SIGRIST: Good afternoon. This is Paul Sigrist for the National Park Service. Today is Tuesday, July 29, 1997. I'm here with Carmella Ricupero Martin. Mrs. Martin came from Italy. They arrived in December 1937, when she was eight years old, and they were detained a few days at Ellis Island because the authorities thought that Mrs. Martin had pinkeye. And I should say that we're in Rotterdam, New York, at the home of Mrs. Martin's sister, Josephine Milano. And she's playing with the microphone cord already. ( they laugh ) All right. Can we begin by you giving me your birth date, please? MARTIN: I was born February 4, 1929. SIGRIST: February 4, 1929. And where were you born? MARTIN: In Locri, Italy. SIGRIST: Can you spell Locri? MARTIN: L-O-C-R-I. SIGRIST: And where is that in Italy? MARTIN: It's somewhere near Rome. I don't know how many miles from Rome, but I remember visiting Rome when I was a child. SIGRIST: Really? What do you remember about that trip? MARTIN: What I remembered was that we went on donkey. ( she laughs ) And, uh, it was a feast day, and what, what impressed me so much was that all the trees were all lit up with lights, and it was so pretty, and that was the only time that I ever was able to go. SIGRIST: Do you know why you went to Rome? MARTIN: It was the feast, and I was old enough . . . SIGRIST: What feast? MARTIN: And I was old enough that I was able to go. I guess you had to be a certain age before you went, otherwise you just weren't able to go. SIGRIST: Do you know anything about the circumstances that surrounded your birth, like what happened that day, any information about that? MARTIN: Uh, what happened the day I was born. SIGRIST: Stories your mother and father might have told? MARTIN: Actually what happened was that my father, or my mother wrote to my father and told him that, uh, I was born, because my father was already here. And, uh, probably got messed up with the writing, and he thought that he had a son, Carmello, instead of a Carmella. So when he came to visit us, he was pretty upset that I wasn't a boy. ( she laughs ) SIGRIST: How old were you when he came to visit? MARTIN: Uh, I was, I was a child still, really, really small, still in a crib. And, uh, I remember, well, I don't remember, but I was told that he, you know, they had a party because he arrived there, and he got a little inebriated, and he was quite upset that I wasn't a boy. And, uh, probably hated me from that day on. ( she laughs ) SIGRIST: Were there other children, too, in the family, brothers and sisters that you had? MARTIN: Later, yes. SIGRIST: Later, but you were the firstborn. MARTIN: I was the firstborn, and I had two, two other sisters, three other sisters. One was born here. SIGRIST: Can you name them for me? MARTIN: Uh, Josephine Milano. SIGRIST: Whose house we're in. MARTIN: And Theresa, and then Annemarie, the one that was born here. And I have a half brother, Frank. SIGRIST: Can you describe for me the house, or the structure that you lived in in Italy? MARTIN: It was, it was just a regular, sort of like a cottage, but it was made out of brick, and it was, we had marble floors. I remember the black and white floor where I used to, like, hopscotch across. And we had a, we were one of the first ones that had like a basement part, and we had a stove down there that, uh, we were able to cook in and do all kinds of things, and ovens, and stuff like that. And, uh, let's see, what else? SIGRIST: Is there a piece of furniture that sticks out in your mind in the house? MARTIN: Actually just the stove was, impressed me, because it was sort of one of the first things that we were able to have, you know? And the other things were either things that you cooked outside like, you know, fireplaces and ovens and, you know. SIGRIST: Were there other family members that lived with you? I mean, obviously you and your mother. MARTIN: Uh . . . SIGRIST: Dad's in America. MARTIN: Not with us, but we had my grandmother, which she lived up the road a little ways from us, wasn't that far. In fact, uh, when I, when we went back to Italy, that was the first thing that I wanted to see was how far we were from our house. In fact, our house was still there. Not the whole house, just the bottom part, and the stove was still there. So that was really weird. SIGRIST: How old were you when you went back for the first time? MARTIN: It was just, it was about four years ago. SIGRIST: Oh, just recently. MARTIN: Yeah, just recently, after I retired. We decided . . . SIGRIST: What did it feel like to be back there? MARTIN: It, it brought back a lot of memories and, uh, I said, gee, that was the best move we made to get away from here. ( she laughs ) Because it was a lot of work over there, you know? They had all these farms, and everybody was constantly working the farms, and I just, wow, if I was still here, I'd be doing that, you know? ( she laughs ) So, of course, I'm working now a lot. ( they laugh ) But not that hard. SIGRIST: You're not doing farm work. MARTIN: Not that hard. SIGRIST: What was your father's name? MARTIN: My father's name was Frank. SIGRIST: And can you tell me a little bit about his background, and why he went to America? MARTIN: You know, to tell you the truth, I don't remember all that much about my father. It, I very seldom saw him. I think he was here most of the time. He visited occasionally, and that was about it. I think the reason that he came over here was to make a better, you know, to better his family, and better himself. Uh, you know, we always heard it was the, you know, the streets were paved with gold, and stuff like that, and I guess he thought that he would be able to do better for himself than out there. At that time in Italy it was very, you know, it was very poor. People didn't have very much. You know, they just had what they, you know, their land. They just grew their own stuff, and things like that. So, and there wasn't very much work. You couldn't, you know, make any kind of a wage. So I think that's really why he came and, uh, after . . . SIGRIST: Is there . . . I'm sorry, go ahead. MARTIN: Then after he, one of the reasons that we came over here was because, I think mainly because of the war, there was talk of war, and he wanted us to come over here before the war started. SIGRIST: You said that he visited a couple of times during your childhood before you came here. Is there one visit that sticks out in your mind for some reason? MARTIN: Yeah. I remember this one particular time when we knew he was coming, and I must have been maybe, I don't know, maybe five or six years old, and I remember his brother who lived, like, down the road from us, uh, when he heard that his brother was coming, he jumped this wire fence and fell over. ( she laughs ) And broke his leg and, uh, you know, he was just, he was so excited to see him, because I guess he hadn't seen him in quite a while. So that impressed me. SIGRIST: Did he ever bring you a present from America? MARTIN: I don't remember him every bringing me anything. I do remember that he brought things for, you know, everybody, you know, but I don't remember anything in particular that he gave me personally. SIGRIST: Um, what was your mother's name? MARTIN: Concetta. SIGRIST: Spell that, please? MARTIN: Concetta. SIGRIST: And her maiden name? MARTIN: Cinanni. SIGRIST: And tell me what you know about your mother's background. MARTIN: My mother came from a very large family, and I think she was the oldest one, if I remember. And, uh, a very nice lady, a very nice lady. She took care of everybody, took care of everything. SIGRIST: What were some of her responsibilities in the house, for instance? MARTIN: Boy, she, she did a lot. Besides taking care of all of us, she had to work the fields, took care of the, you know, her brothers, the uncles, uh, all the male that were working in the fields, they would come home, or come back in the evening, and she, you know, they would all be preparing meals and stuff like that. And, uh, she would make wine. And always canning and, you know, things like that. SIGRIST: Was there something that you particularly enjoyed doing with your mother when you were a child in Italy? MARTIN: I used to love to watch them making bread. SIGRIST: Can you describe the process a little bit? MARTIN: I don't know the process, because to this day I don't know how to make bread. But, anyway, they, you know, we'd have this huge oven out, outside, and it would be my mother and my aunts and my grandmother, and there would be a bunch of us little kids running around, you know, and in order to keep us quiet they promised to make us a little loaf of bread, you know. So that was fun, that was exciting. That was our big prize, to be quiet. ( she laughs ) SIGRIST: Well, what do you think was so fascinating about the process of making bread, from the point of view of being a little kid? MARTIN: It just seemed as though it was like a little family thing, you know, and it was fun to, uh, to be part of a family. The kids were kind of always more or less shoved away, you know? The adults would eat, and then after they would eat, then we'd come in and eat, you know? And to be part of the whole group seemed like, you know, we were something, finally, you know? And to have just that little piece of bread was great, you know. SIGRIST: You mentioned a grandmother. Is this Dad's mom, or Mom's mom? MARTIN: It was my mother's mother. SIGRIST: What do you remember about your grandmother? MARTIN: My grandmother was the matriarch of everybody. She was the head of the household. She knew everything, did everything, and very, very intelligent woman. We could always go to her for almost anything. SIGRIST: Can you describe what she looked like? MARTIN: She probably was about, um, I remember, of course, when I was young, everybody looked tall to me, but she seemed very tall to me, and thin. I wouldn't say muscular but, you know, working in the fields and farm and everything, they were pretty tough and strong. But she, she was out there working all the time. SIGRIST: Was there a grandfather that went with the grandmother? MARTIN: Yes. I had a grandfather. And I've got to tell you a story about my grandfather. My grandfather had one of those moustaches, you know, what do they call those . . . SIGRIST: You're gesturing like a panhandle. MARTIN: Yeah. And he had one, I forgot what they're called. But anyway, he had this moustache that he was very proud of, you know, and always twisting the ends. And he was sleeping one time, and I had scissors, and I took part of, one half of it off. ( she laughs ) So that's what I remember about him. SIGRIST: May I ask what his reaction was to that? MARTIN: He was a little upset about it, but it was, it was not that bad so he couldn't grow it back again. Of course, he had to cut the other side to match the one side, but, uh, that's what I remember about him. They, they, um, the men, for some reason, they didn't pay that much attention to us. You know, we'd come in and they'd pat us on the head, and then we'd be off again somewhere, you know. We were always outside playing, or whatever. SIGRIST: What do you remember about, about being a small girl in Italy, and you say you ran off and played? What did you do? What, how would you entertain yourself as a child? MARTIN: Well, let's see. We would, when I was younger, I had responsibilities, a lot of them. I had to go out in the fields with my animals and, uh, would take the sheep out or the goats, and they, I would get like a, a half a loaf of bread, like crusted, and that would be my meal for the day, because most of the time we found things to eat, because there was always fruit growing, or berries, or whatever. So I'd be out almost all day just with, uh, either the sheep or the goats or whatever. And, uh, that would, that would take up most of our time, and then, of course, I went to school. We had to walk to school barefoot. ( she laughs ) Like Bill Cosby, you know. ( she laughs ) SIGRIST: Is there a story that you can tell about something that happened at school one time? MARTIN: Yeah. Walking to school this one particular day, I walked by this hole that was in the ground, and there was a bunch of snakes, and I stepped right in it. And so instead of continuing on to school, I ran back home again, and my mother was upset because I didn't continue going to school. There was, uh, we had, we had like a, a pool that we would catch water, because water was very scarce, and there was always water snakes, or water moccasins in the water and everything, that was scary. And, uh, let's see, there was, there was a time that, I can tell you this story. My sister doesn't remember it. We were without water, and I woke up during the night, and I was very thirsty, and there was no water to drink. And I kept crying, and my mother would say, "Well, you know, we've got water that the men used to wash their hands with," and I said, "I'll drink that, anything." You know. And so I'm laying there in my bed, and I could see, you know, after a while your eyes get accustomed to dark, and there's this big black snake that had come inside the house, and it was headed for my, for my sister's crib. And I, naturally I woke up and I got a hold of my, I woke up my mother. My mother called my uncle, and he came and he killed it. But the snake was going after my sister's milk bottle. So that was kind of scary. But, uh, that's about the only thing that I can remember of the, you know, we used to always be, you know, we'd wash, do our laundry in a creek, you know, and use a rock to, to wash with, and then we'd hang them, like, on bushes, on top of this hill, and I used to go up there a lot, up on the hill, and just sit and wash the clouds, and dream, you know? ( she laughs ) SIGRIST: You mentioned going to school. Could your mother or your grandmother read and write? MARTIN: Uh, evidently my mother did, because she would write to my father. So I don't know if she wrote the letters. I think she did, unless somebody else did. I never really paid all that much attention, but I know that he got letters. And he, my father would send letters, too, so somebody would read them. SIGRIST: Someone able to do that. What religion were you? MARTIN: Catholic. SIGRIST: Can you tell me how you practiced your religion at home? MARTIN: Well, we always prayed, always, before meals. SIGRIST: Is there a prayer in Italian that you still remember? MARTIN: Uh, no. ( she laughs ) I don't remember any Italian prayers. It was similar to, "Thank you, God, for our food, and bless everyone and make them healthy, and make the green grass grow so that our sheep and cows would have food." And, you know, stuff like that. SIGRIST: Did you have religious articles in the house? MARTIN: Oh, yeah. There were statues all over the place. We had statutes of the Sacred Heart, and statues of the Blessed Mother, crosses of God all over the place. Yeah, there was, very religious. SIGRIST: And what about actually going to a church? Was there a church nearby, or . . . MARTIN: I think the only time that they went to church, I didn't go, was in Rome, because I don't remember, there probably was churches close by, but I don't ever remember really going to them. SIGRIST: So your religious life is really centered around the home. MARTIN: Yeah, yeah. SIGRIST: What about holidays? You mentioned celebrating a saint's day or something in Rome. MARTIN: Yeah. SIGRIST: What do you remember about holiday celebrations at your own home? Did you celebrate Easter or Christmas in some way, or . . . MARTIN: No, I don't ever remember Easter. Christmas was a big thing there, Christmas time. Easter, I don't remember that much about Easter. We didn't have any eggs. We had eggs, but we never colored them or anything or hard boiled them or any of that stuff. But, uh, I remember at Christmas time we would get like a little gift, maybe another loaf of bread. I don't, I don't remember ever really getting gifts. The only toys that we had were things that we would find. And I can remember this one particular time walking along the creek, and I found a stone that kind of was tall, and I remember it had almost the shape of a doll, and I would, I picked that, and I brought it home, and I'd make clothes for it. ( she laughs ) But that was my toy, you know. That was about it. SIGRIST: Clothing. What kind of clothes did you wear as a little kid, and where did they come from? MARTIN: Just, um, they, I think they made most of our clothes. You know, living in a hot area we didn't have that many clothes. All we had was maybe just a little, shorts or something. That was it. And if we had to go anywhere special, uh, I remember, in fact, that picture that my sister showed me, or showed you, has the dress that my mother knitted, or crocheted. That was my good dress. And, uh, I think they made most of their stuff, yeah, most of the clothes. SIGRIST: So your mother would do handiwork of some sort? MARTIN: Oh, yeah, yeah. They all knew how to crochet and weave, and they, we had, we had sheep that they would take the wool from the sheep and have the spinning wheels, and they did all that, yeah. SIGRIST: A tough life. MARTIN: Oh, it was. I can't imagine working, you know, living that way. SIGRIST: When your father first came to the United States, which was before you were born, I guess? MARTIN: Uh-huh, uh-huh. SIGRIST: Was that the first time he went, before you were born? MARTIN: I don't know. I don't really know if he came before that, or that was the first time, or what. SIGRIST: That's the first time you know about. MARTIN: Yeah, the first time that I know about. SIGRIST: Where did he go, and what did he do? MARTIN: He went to Albany. And I can't remember if he had a friend or a relative that he stayed with. He eventually got his own place, bought a home, and, uh, was planning on sending for us at the time. But I don't . . . SIGRIST: How did you think about America as a little girl in Italy? What ideas did you have about this place? MARTIN: It just seemed, you know, I really didn't hear all that much, because they didn't tell us little kids very much, but when I finally knew that we were going to be leaving Italy and coming to the United States, and everybody was saying, "Oh, it's going to be great. You're going to have all kinds of things, plentiful. And, uh, you never have to worry about anything. You're going to have all kinds of food and clothes and a house and, you know, everything that you want will be there." I never was, I didn't feel I was for want in Italy, you know? ( she laughs ) But you never know that you're poor, you know, until somebody tells you that you are, you know? But, uh . . . SIGRIST: Do you remember, was there a specific moment when your mother told you you were leaving this place? MARTIN: Yes. She, because by that time I was eight years old, and when she told me that we were going to go to live with my father in the United States, I had to say goodbye to all my friends, and I had this one little boy friend that was really upset because I was going to leave. Because in Italy they have you almost, you know, planned on who you're going to marry and everything, and this kid was supposed to be my husband in the future. And he says, "I'll probably never see you again." I says, "Oh, no, I'll come and visit." You know, "I'll come and visit." Because I never really knew how far we were going to be. I thought it was, like, down the road somewhere, you know? I'm going to just go to the United States, and I'll be back. And, uh, I remember one of my uncles, when we were in the train station, they had this big fountain, you know. And he says, "Carmella, next time you see this, it'll probably be all old and worn out." I remember that as plain as anything. So when I did go it was still there, but it wasn't . . . SIGRIST: When you went to visit. MARTIN: It wasn't, yeah, when I went to visit it was still there, but I didn't see it all worn out and everything. It seemed like, like when I left. ( she laughs ) SIGRIST: They kept it up. MARTIN: They kept it up, yeah. SIGRIST: What did you have to do prior to leaving? What had to be done before you could leave Italy? MARTIN: Well, I remember that I had to go see the doctor because of my eye. SIGRIST: Tell me a little bit about what was wrong with your eye. MARTIN: Uh, you know, nobody ever really told me, because when I was born, we didn't have doctors. It was just a midwife, and I think it was my grandmother that delivered me, or my aunt, one of them. And in order to, uh, you know, clean my eyes out, they put some sort of solution in there, and either that injured my eye or what. I never really knew. But I had this redness in my eyes, and they said it was a . . . SIGRIST: It was your left . . . MARTIN: It's my left eye, and it's still there to this day. So that was one of the things that detained us from coming over, because I had to keep going back and forth to doctors. And finally it was making it worse, so the doctor, I assume, had to write to whoever he had to write to, or make some sort of letter saying that it's not pinkeye, that it's just a birth defect. And so eventually we were able to come. SIGRIST: How long did all that take, do you think? MARTIN: It seemed to me, and I was trying to check into it, it seemed like we were, like a year, almost, you know, before we were able to, and I'm not sure whether you have a certain time before you're able to come again as an immigrant or, you know, you can just wait a couple of months or what. I never was sure of that, but it seemed like a whole year that we were back and forth to doctors and stuff. And then finally they says, "No, she's fine." And that's why we came to, uh, Ellis Island, and they checked us over there, and . . . SIGRIST: Were any of your sisters, your sisters were born by now, right? MARTIN: Oh, yeah. SIGRIST: Except for Annemarie. MARTIN: Yeah. SIGRIST: So it, so it's Mom, and how many kids? MARTIN: Three. SIGRIST: Three kids. MARTIN: Uh-huh. SIGRIST: Grandma's staying in Italy. MARTIN: Oh, yeah. Everybody was there. Everybody was still in Italy. SIGRIST: Do you remember saying goodbye to your grandparents? MARTIN: Yeah. I was crying, and everybody was crying, because they knew that they probably would never see us again. SIGRIST: Do you remember what you packed? What was there to take to America? MARTIN: I didn't, I don't remember packing anything. ( she laughs ) My mother did all the packing. You know, I remember having these big trunks that they put a whole bunch of stuff in, and I guess my stuff was in there, too. I didn't have any toys that I could bring with me. I think my uncle gave me something, and I don't remember if it was a medal or what. SIGRIST: A medal that you pin on? MARTIN: No, a medal from around my neck, a Blessed Mother medal. SIGRIST: I see. MARTIN: It was, yes. In fact, I still have it. I still have it. Yes, I do. Yeah, in my jewelry box. SIGRIST: Where did you have to go to get on the ship? MARTIN: Boy, you got me there. I don't know. I don't remember. SIGRIST: Do you have any recollections of the journey to get to the ship from your town? MARTIN: We had, we had a, somebody drove us by car, which was unusual, because there weren't that many cars. And they did drive us to wherever we had to pick up the boat, at some port somewhere. And, uh, it seemed like, uh, it was crazy. I remember it was really crazy. SIGRIST: Do you remember what your impressions were when you first saw the ship? MARTIN: Uh, not really. It just, it was exciting, you know. I was a kid, and it seemed like, wow, that's huge, you know, it's big. And, uh, all those people were on it. And, uh . . . SIGRIST: Do you know the name of it? MARTIN: No, I don't remember the name. I wish I did, but it was probably L'Italia or something. SIGRIST: Um, what, had your mother ever been on a ship before? MARTIN: Not that I know of. No, she was kind of scared, too. Yeah. It was scary, because it was the first time we were ever away from home. We were traveling alone, and my younger sister was ill. SIGRIST: Josephine? MARTIN: Yeah. She was ill all the way. And my mother, my poor mother never even left the cabin, hardly. They even had to bring the food to her. And my other sister and I were just roaming the ship, and everybody was taking care of us and, you know. SIGRIST: What did you see on the ship when you were roaming around? MARTIN: Uh, just a lot of people, a lot of people, and we ran into some bad storms, and I remember being awakened during the night to put our lifebelts on, or lifejackets on, and it seemed like fun to us. We weren't even worried that anything was happening. And a lot of times my sister and I would go on deck, and we'd see these big waves, and I remember people were taking us away from there because we'd be washed away if, uh, you know, if a big wave came along. And, uh, but we were having a lot of fun just running around by ourselves. SIGRIST: Did you see anything on the ship that you had never seen before? MARTIN: Probably everything ( she laughs ) that I never saw before. You know, just boats and lifejackets and, you know, stuff like that. SIGRIST: So your sister Josephine, she was the only one who got sick. MARTIN: Yeah. SIGRIST: Mom didn't get sick. MARTIN: No. SIGRIST: How long did the ship take to get to New York? MARTIN: Oh, boy. I knew you were going to ask me that. It seemed like we were on water for a month, but I have no idea how long it took. It probably took a long time. I would say maybe a couple of weeks, if not a month. SIGRIST: What do you remember about the ship coming in to New York Harbor? MARTIN: I remember somebody yelling, "There's the Statue of Liberty!" And I'm wondering, "What the heck is the Statue of Liberty?" You know, and a couple of people that had been to Italy and were living here knew about the Statue of Liberty, so they were trying to tell us about it, you know. So that was the first thing that I think everybody was impressed with, the Statue of Liberty. So, uh, the other thing, uh, that impressed, not impressed me, but upset me, was that it was cold. It was cold! SIGRIST: It's December, correct? MARTIN: It was December. And, uh, we, we weren't really prepared for that kind of weather, and we didn't like it. We were all crying then. And then we met up with my father, and he didn't know how to quiet us down, so he goes out and buys us an ice cream, which was even worse, because then we were even colder. ( she laughs ) So, and we were laying down on the, uh, benches at the station and, uh, he's covering us up, trying to get blankets out of a, you know, out of the suitcases and the trunks and, to keep us warm, so. ( she laughs ) That was one of the things I didn't like here, because I was always warm, because where we came from was, you know, was like warm weather all the time. Oh, yeah. SIGRIST: Warm and loaded with snakes. ( they laugh ) Tell me about, all right. The ship comes into New York Harbor. Tell me about how you find out you have to go to Ellis Island, and how you got there, what you remember of that. MARTIN: Uh, we, when we got to, uh, the port, we, my father was the one that was told that he had to take me to this room to be examined by a doctor, and that's what he did. He had to, you know, he knew exactly, I guess they give you the information, what room you have to go in, and he took me there, and they, I remember the doctor examining me, and I can't remember if he put anything in my eye or not. I don't remember that. But, uh, evidently they were, they figured that I didn't have the pinkeye and they let us go, but it took, you know, a while before they discovered that. SIGRIST: You think . . . ( he clears his throat ) Excuse me. How many days do you think . . . MARTIN: I would say a couple, maybe it wasn't a couple of days. Maybe it was just a whole day. It seemed like we were there for a long time. And wondering when the heck are we going to get out of here, you know? SIGRIST: Do you remember any other details about being there? MARTIN: At Ellis Island? SIGRIST: Yeah, what it looked like, or any interaction with the staff, or how your parents felt? MARTIN: It was just lines and lines and lines, and people telling you where you had to go. You go there, and then you had to go somewhere else, and it seemed like a never-ending line. And the staff, I guess, were okay. I really didn't have to deal with the staff. My father did most of the dealing with them. And, uh, I remember he was getting pretty frustrated, because he'd say, "Well, gee, we just, you know, we were told to go here, and now we got to go there." You know, "and then we got to do this, and when are we going to be able to leave here?" So, uh . . . SIGRIST: Do you remember how you felt as the child detaining the family? MARTIN: I was, well, I, I don't really, I don't really think that it was my fault, you know? It was just something that they, I thought that everybody had to do that, you know, coming over. Because I saw a lot of people that had to go in these different rooms. So I thought it was just one of the processes they had to go through in order to, you know, to come into, uh, the United States, just to be examined. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO SIGRIST: Tell me a little bit about seeing your father, because you hadn't seen him for a little while. MARTIN: When I first saw my father, to tell you the truth, when I got off the boat I heard my mother say, "Oh, there's your father," and I'm looking all over. I didn't even know who he was. I didn't even recognize my father. But here comes this man, and he picked us up and hugged us and everything. And I says, "Oh, that's my father." Okay. ( she laughs ) You know? But I don't, I don't really remember my father, hardly. I mean, we came to the United States to really a stranger to me. And I don't think my sisters even, knew him even less than I did, you know? SIGRIST: Sure, because they're so much younger. MARTIN: Yeah. And, uh, then, I don't know if you want me to continue with that. SIGRIST: Yeah. Actually, I'd like to. We got you through Ellis Island. They figured out that everything was okay. MARTIN: Everything was okay. We finally . . . SIGRIST: And where did Dad . . . MARTIN: Well, then we went to, uh, my, one of my relatives' houses. SIGRIST: In New York city, or . . . MARTIN: No, in Albany. SIGRIST: All right, so you got on a train. MARTIN: So we had to go on a train, yeah. SIGRIST: Do you remember any of that, or seeing things out the window? MARTIN: Not really. I think by that time it was night, and there really wasn't too much to see, and we just slept all the way to Albany. And, uh, then my father woke us up, and we went in to visit the relatives. And I think we stayed there that time with them until my father found a place. And I can't remember if he had a place, or we were supposed to be going into it shortly, but we stayed with her for a little bit. SIGRIST: How long? MARTIN: With them? Probably a month. SIGRIST: What do you remember about those first couple of days in America? What . . . MARTIN: It was scary. SIGRIST: What were some of the things that made an impression on you in terms of being with these relatives and being in this strange country? MARTIN: Well, I didn't know anybody, and that was very upsetting, because I felt like I left my family back in Italy and I didn't know anyone here, not even my father. And the relatives were all, you know, really nice to us and, you know, made us feel at home as much as we could. But they really didn't pay all that much attention to the kids. They were just talking amongst the adults, and how was the trip, how did you make out and, you know, here's your stuff, and you're going to sleep here, and, you know, all that stuff. So, um, I was very lonesome and scared, and I was wondering where, you know, what's going to happen to us, where are we going to go, you know? And we were told that we were going to go to school. We were out during Christmas vacation. We were going to be enrolled in school right after, when school started. We went to school, we didn't know a word of English. I remember I had to, I had to go to the ladies room, and I didn't know how to say it. ( she laughs ) So I ended up wetting my pants. ( she laughs ) And one of the nuns that took care of us, well, we found out that there was a nun who was able to speak Italian, and she kind of, you know, took care of us, took us under her wing. SIGRIST: Do you remember what school this was in Albany? MARTIN: Uh, it was one of the public schools. SIGRIST: So you were living at home and going to school. MARTIN: Yeah, we were living at home and going to school. But, uh, we weren't, uh, it wasn't long after that that, well, my mother got pregnant. SIGRIST: This would be Annemarie. MARTIN: Yeah, this is my younger sister. And, uh, she died a year after we came. SIGRIST: Your mother did. MARTIN: My mother died. She was only twenty-nine years old when she did. And that . . . SIGRIST: Died of what? MARTIN: A heart attack. Right after, well, right after my sister was born, it was like three months later. We were having a Christening party for her. And she, she had a heart attack that night. And that very night she was sent to a, uh, I forget the name of it. St. Mary's? I forget the name of it. But, anyway, she was sent up there to a children's home. And my other two sisters were also sent to St. Vincent's Home, and I was left at home. They didn't know what to do with me, because I was older. By that time I was nine, ten. And, uh, it, it was just difficult, because we didn't know any English, you know. And here we didn't have a mother all of a sudden, and we're stuck with my father, who we hardly knew. SIGRIST: And what is he doing? How is he supporting the family? MARTIN: Well, my father worked, he was a mason. So he, uh, he was good at that stuff, you know. He worked all the time. SIGRIST: Do you know if your father made the decision to split the children up, or if the relatives made that decision? MARTIN: I think it was, uh, I think actually maybe it was a mutual thing, because my sister was only three months old. She wasn't able to, she was too young to go to where my other two sisters were. And I guess they just felt that I was going to, I was old enough where I could stay at home and kind of keep house for my father. SIGRIST: I see. So Josephine and . . . MARTIN: And Theresa. SIGRIST: Theresa, they're at . . . MARTIN: They're at St. Vincent's, yeah. SIGRIST: And what is St. Vincent's? It's a convent? MARTIN: It was a convent. SIGRIST: A convent. MARTIN: A girls' home. SIGRIST: I see. And you . . . MARTIN: And that's where . . . SIGRIST: You remained with your father. MARTIN: I remained with my father for a short time, and my father took to drinking a lot, and very abusive. So then I went into the home, too. SIGRIST: To St. Vincent's. MARTIN: Yeah. So, and I stayed there until I graduated from high school. SIGRIST: Can you talk about life at St. Vincent's, and what that experience was like, maybe the positive side and the negative side of that experience? MARTIN: Well, if we were going to be anywhere that was probably the best place for us to be, because we were brought up by nuns, very religious, and they, I thought they took very good care of us. And, uh . . . SIGRIST: Can you talk about the actual, like where you slept, and where you ate? MARTIN: We had dormitories that were like barracks, you know? We had beds side by side. I think there were like over a hundred girls that were there at the time. We ate in a cafeteria, and we were provided with anything that we needed, really. You know, our clothes. We all had to, we all had like a little duty that we had to do, like my, I used to take care of, like, the altar in the church and, uh, we'd scrub floors and, uh, you know, do, make beds and, uh, washing, and we're, sometimes we'd have to work in the kitchen. We all had duties that we had to perform. SIGRIST: Now, how did you learn English? Were you speaking English by this point, or . . . MARTIN: You know, I don't even know! I just all of a sudden just spoke English. I think it was probably because we had to. And, uh, you know, in order to, uh, converse with anybody, we had to learn how to speak English really quick. SIGRIST: Do you remember the process of learning English, like some of the first words that you caught onto, and . . . MARTIN: Food. ( she laughs ) I don't remember the first words. I think that, uh, the, uh, the nun that was kind of taking care of us that spoke Italian would teach us, like this is a certain thing, and that's how you say it in Italian, and this is how you say it in English. So eventually, you know, we just put words together and were able to learn that way. SIGRIST: Had your father learned English in the time he was . . . MARTIN: Yeah, he learned English, but he spoke Italian most of the time. And I was able to understand him, you know, after a while, after that. But I forgot how to speak Italian, because we never . . . SIGRIST: Well, and your mother, you know, for the year that she was with you, did she attempt to learn English at all? MARTIN: I don't remember her learning any English, to tell you the truth. I just . . . SIGRIST: Did she get a job? MARTIN: We always, no, no. She got pregnant right away, and I don't think that she even planned on getting a job, because we still were young. There was four of us by that time. Not for long because, you know, she died right away. SIGRIST: Were there other immigrant children at St. Vincent's? MARTIN: Not that I know of, no. SIGRIST: Did you ever feel any kind of prejudice against you, because . . . MARTIN: No, no. SIGRIST: Did the other children know that you were foreign born? MARTIN: I don't think so. I don't really know if they ever said anything to them. They just, you know, you're just brought in, you're told that, you know, Carmella's mother died, and this is why she's here, because her father's unable to take care of her, you know, by himself, and he had to work. SIGRIST: What kind of interaction did you have with your father after you went into St. Vincent's? MARTIN: I didn't like my father. ( she laughs ) SIGRIST: Did you see him once a year, or . . . MARTIN: It's a terrible, uh, after we went to St. Vincent's? SIGRIST: Yeah, afterward. MARTIN: We saw him, he would come up maybe every other week or so and, uh, this one particular time he came up and he was drunk out of his mind, and he was searching and yelling at the nuns and chasing kids around, and the nuns took us and hid us in one of the rooms so that he couldn't get us. And I guess they called the cops, they put him in jail. ( she laughs ) Yeah. SIGRIST: Did your father ever go back to Italy to live? MARTIN: After that? No, no. SIGRIST: He stayed here. MARTIN: He stayed here, yeah. I think he went back to Italy to visit at one time, but, oh, sure. He went back to Italy and got married. ( she laughs ) That's right, I remember. Now I had a stepmother. SIGRIST: How long after your mother's death did that happen? Was it a number of years? MARTIN: Probably I would say maybe five or six years that he got married again, yeah. SIGRIST: What's your fondest memory of being at St. Vincent's? What did you like the most? MARTIN: I liked, I liked the fact that the nuns took us, you know, under their wing and, uh, were very kind to us, and they really, you know, they taught us, uh, about God and, you know, I felt safe there. I felt safe. Yeah. I had everything that I needed, you know. SIGRIST: Were there other relatives that came and visited? Did you have any interaction with any other kind of family? MARTIN: I don't remember anybody else coming to visit. They would come and visit when my father would take us home on certain occasions, and they would be there to visit. Either we, they'd come to our house and visit us, or we'd go and visit them, see? That's, that's the only time that we saw any relatives. We really didn't have all that many relatives here. Everybody was in Italy, you know? Eventually they did come to America also. We have relatives now that are in The Bahamas and in Canada and in, uh, where else? All over. Australia. SIGRIST: Were you in communication at all with your grandmother? Did you ever write to your grandmother or grandfather? MARTIN: No, uh-uh, no. My mother and father did. Um, but, um, I think after my mother died it was just like, uh, it was like there was nobody on our family. This is why we lost, we lost track of all our family after my mother died. We, because we, we didn't even know how to write letters to Italy. Nobody ever really showed us how. But, um, we lost contact with a lot of them. And, in fact, we just met some of our relatives from, uh, from Australia, that we hadn't seen in fifty years. SIGRIST: Well, that's exciting. MARTIN: Our uncles. Oh, my God. It was, I get goosebumps just thinking about it now. After fifty years we found, we discovered that we had relatives in Australia, and we went down to visit them. We went back to Italy to see some of our relatives there, in Canada, Bahamas. SIGRIST: Let me just ask you a couple of final questions, and one is right along these lines. When you think of yourself in terms of nationality, how do you think of yourself? MARTIN: I think of myself as an American. SIGRIST: Did you become a citizen? MARTIN: Uh, we were citizens through my father's and my mother being a citizen. But, uh, we didn't, I don't know whatever happened to our, uh, citizenship papers, but I remember this one particular time, oh, in fact, when we were going to Australia and to Italy, we needed to have a passport, and to prove that we were citizens, and we couldn't. We had no, no nothing that we could prove that we were. And my sister and I got together, and we did finally get citizenship papers that, you know, that were finally, uh, you know, okay. But, I mean, we, I knew we were citizens, but I didn't know how we got to be citizens. But it was through our mother and father. SIGRIST: You say you think of yourself as American. What do you think about you is Italian? What aspect of your personality is particularly Italian? MARTIN: Oh, boy. I'm dark? ( she laughs ) I'm short. SIGRIST: Well, that's something. ( he laughs ) MARTIN: And, uh . . . SIGRIST: What about in terms of things that you enjoy doing in life, or certain attitudes you may have? MARTIN: I'm happy-go-lucky and I, uh, I love people. I don't know if that is an Italian trait. Yes, it is, because somebody said that, "Thank God for Italians. They're always kissing everybody." ( she laughs ) So that must be, that must be it. SIGRIST: That warmth. ( he laughs ) MARTIN: That warmth. Yeah, we love everybody. ( she laughs ) SIGRIST: What did you do in your life that you're the most proud of? MARTIN: Oh, boy. I think, I think probably bringing up my children. SIGRIST: And their names? MARTIN: I had nine of them, and I had brought them up all by myself, because my husband wasn't around. Their names are Bill, Tom, Diane, uh, let's see, Diane, there's Bob, Ed, Nadine. Then there's Wayne, Glen and Valerie. I had six boys, three girls, and I had them all in order. I had two boys and a girl, two boys and a girl, and two boys and a girl. ( she laughs ) SIGRIST: And how much interest do your children show in their family background and in their Italian cultural heritage? MARTIN: Uh, just recently they've been, and I think probably because I've shown an interest, and I said, gee, you know, I should make a family tree, I should check into this, do that, you know. And they're interested in that way that, uh, you know, uh . . . SIGRIST: Little did you know you'd be doing an oral history tape. MARTIN: No. ( she laughs ) But it's interesting. Even the grandchildren. They, uh . . . SIGRIST: Have any of them attempted to learn Italian? MARTIN: No, no. Even I have not bothered with it. We went to Italy and couldn't speak a word of Italian. Thank God that we had a relative that, who was with us, that was able to speak Italian and, you know, let us know what was being said. I felt terrible. My sister decided that she was going to learn Italian, because she wanted to go back, but I didn't want to go back. I figured I did it, and that was it. You know, I saw what I wanted to see, and I have no, you know, no intentions of going back. Maybe some day a tour of something, you know, and go see other places. Because when we went there, we went to where we were born, it was all farms, you know, dirt roads, cows, you know, sheep and stuff, and it wasn't all that much fun. So, and we really couldn't go and do anything or see anything. So . . . SIGRIST: Did you feel that you had an emotional connection to what you were seeing when you were there? MARTIN: Yeah, yeah, I did, yeah. SIGRIST: How do you think your life would have been different if you never came here? MARTIN: I don't know if I, I don't know if I'd be alive, to tell you the truth, because of the war. I don't know if I would have been killed, or ended up with some Russian or, uh, whatever. I really don't know what would have happened. Or I could have married my, the love of my life there, and taken up farming, and . . . SIGRIST: Right, in the snake-infested farm. ( they laugh ) Well, I want to thank you very much for letting me ask you these questions. MARTIN: Thank you very much, Paul. SIGRIST: It was wonderful. MARTIN: It was fun. SIGRIST: This is Paul Sigrist signing off with Carmella Ricupero Martin. I flipped the R, sorry about that. Ricupero. And today is Tuesday, July 29, 1997, and I'm at Mrs. Martin's sister's home in Rotterdam, New York. Thank you. MARTIN: Thank you.