LEVINE: This is Janet Levine for the National Park Service, and I'm here today in Camden, Maine with Mrs. Helmi Masalin. We're here at her home, the Masalin home, and it is December 30, 1993. And, um, I want to say that I'm very happy to be here, and I'm very interested to her a Finland story. Uh, Mrs. Masalin came from Finland when she was eight years old in 1923. And why don't we begin by your saying your whole name and your birth date. MASALIN: My whole name? ( they laugh ) Oh, boy. Helmi. Wilhelmina Heino Ranta Masalin. LEVINE: Okay. And your maiden name was? MASALIN: Helmi Heino. LEVINE: Okay. And your birthdate? MASALIN: July 23, 1914. LEVINE: Where were you born? MASALIN: I was born in Forssa. LEVINE: Oh, could you spell any words? MASALIN: F-O-R-S-S-A, Finland. LEVINE: And was that a big town, a city, a village? MASALIN: Well, it was a town. LEVINE: About, in other words, it was like a medium-sized town, would you say? MASALIN: I would say so, maybe like Camden. LEVINE: And was there a major industry in that town? MASALIN: That I don't remember. LEVINE: Do you remember what most people did? MASALIN: All I remember was my father was a carpenter. LEVINE: Oh. And what was your father's name? MASALIN: Kalle, K-A-L-L-E. LEVINE: And what kinds of things did he make? MASALIN: Well, he made, he built buildings and made furniture. That's what I can remember. LEVINE: Uh-huh. And your mother, what was her maiden name, her name and her maiden name? MASALIN: Her name was Wilhelmiina Nakio, W-I-L-H-E-L-M-I-I-N-A N-A-K-I-O. LEVINE: And did you have grandparents living nearby? MASALIN: Yes, we did. We had grandparents, one set of grandparents. I can't remember their full names, only their last name was Nakio, N-A-K-I-O. LEVINE: So that was your mother's mother and father. MASALIN: Yeah. LEVINE: Do you remember any experiences with those grandparents when you were a little girl? MASALIN: No. The only thing I can remember, playing outside with my cousin, getting my foot caught in the snow, and he had to pull it out. LEVINE: Um, did you have, like, aunts and uncles and cousins, very many around, or . . . MASALIN: Yes, there were aunts and uncles, and the aunt that I remember particularly, I can remember her crying so hard when we left to come here. LEVINE: What was her name? MASALIN: Sylvia. LEVINE: And that was your mother's sister? MASALIN: Yes. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Do you remember any things that you did as a family, or that you did with either of your parents when you were a little girl in Finland? MASALIN: Well, the only thing I can think of was going to sauna like we always did. LEVINE: Oh, describe what that was like. MASALIN: Well, it was a Saturday night ritual. ( she laughs ) You had to go get scrubbed up for the Sunday. And, uh . . . LEVINE: Now, would everybody be in the same room, the whole family? MASALIN: Oh, yes, the whole family. They're not body-conscious. Finnish people are not body-conscious. LEVINE: Uh-huh. So, uh, and you had two brothers? MASALIN: Yes. And a sister. LEVINE: And a sister. So where were you in the birth order? MASALIN: Last one. LEVINE: You were the baby. Uh-huh, uh-huh. MASALIN: My sister never did come over here. She stayed there. LEVINE: I see. And your brothers? MASALIN: My brothers came with us. LEVINE: Uh-huh. And what were their names? MASALIN: Uh, my oldest brother's name was Kalle. He went by Charles afterwards, but his first name was Kalle, K-A- L-L-E, Heino, H-E-I-N-O. LEVINE: And your other brother? MASALIN: My other brother is Einary, E-I-N-A-R-Y, Heino. He's still alive, but my older brother's gone. LEVINE: Uh-huh. And is this brother nearby? MASALIN: He's in Fitchburg, Massachusetts. LEVINE: Uh-huh. And, um, let's see, and your sister, who stayed in Finland, her name? MASALIN: Her name was Aily, A-I-L-Y. LEVINE: And so, uh, let's see. Do you remember what you did for fun when you were a little girl? MASALIN: Well, I don't know if there was a whole lot of fun except just playing around. LEVINE: Like, did you iceskate, did you . . . MASALIN: I didn't have any skates. I didn't have any sled. I didn't have much of anything. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Would you say your family was, uh, comfortable, or not, not able to provide? MASALIN: Well, they really couldn't provide too much for, if we got by, that was. LEVINE: And . . . MASALIN: This is why my aunt decided that we should come here. She thought it would be better for us. LEVINE: Now, is this the aunt that . . . MASALIN: No, she was a, she's passed away now. She was a maiden aunt. She worked in New York City as a cook. And she worked for the rich people, like I guess she worked for the Rockefellers, for one. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Now, so she had come, do you remember when she came to the United States? MASALIN: I don't remember. She came long before I was born, I guess. LEVINE: Oh. Now, was she in correspondence? MASALIN: Oh, yes. LEVINE: So do you remember what you knew about the United States before you actually came? MASALIN: No, because I was young enough that I didn't have any idea. LEVINE: How about religion? Were you from a religious family? MASALIN: Well, we went to church once in a while. I can remember going to a Christmas Eve church service in a sleigh, and my mother and my two brothers, my sister wasn't at home at the time, and my older brother scolded my mother. She didn't think I was, he didn't think that I was warm enough in the sleigh. ( she laughs ) I seem to remember that. LEVINE: What was Christmas like in Finland? Was it, how, was it different from this Christmas here? MASALIN: Well, we always had Christmas Christmas Eve. But, of course, we didn't have too much, so it didn't register a whole lot with you. If you got a ball or something, that was about it. LEVINE: Do you remember music, or dancing, or handcrafts, any of those kinds of things? MASALIN: Oh, I remember music. I can remember my, my father dancing around the hall somewhere. I don't remember where it was, but he had me in his arms, and he was dancing with me. And, uh, my brothers both had lovely voices. They could sing. And my sister could, too. I couldn't sing a note if my life depended on it. So. LEVINE: How about handiwork? Was there any of that, that you recall? MASALIN: Well, my mother sewed, because she had to sew for the family to keep us in clothes. And I can always remember her sewing. So, other than that, there was no fancy work. Couldn't afford it. LEVINE: So your mother didn't, didn't work. Women weren't really out working. MASALIN: No, they didn't work out there. They worked at home. LEVINE: They were at home, uh-huh. Um, let's see. How about your mother and father? What were the qualities or traits that you remember about them from when you were little? MASALIN: Well, I don't know. LEVINE: Did they ever try to teach you things, I mean, did they have certain ideas or attitudes or values that they tried to instill in you that you can recall? MASALIN: No, I can't think of anything. I guess we just grew up. LEVINE: Were they strict parents? MASALIN: Uh, my father was. LEVINE: What would he be, like, strict about? MASALIN: Well, if you weren't around on time somewhere you went or anything, like, you were apt to get a licking. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Would that be with a paddle? Do you remember? MASALIN: Well, yes, most anything that could hold up, I guess. ( they laugh ) LEVINE: And your mother? What was she like? MASALIN: She was, she was very lenient, very lenient, very quiet and lenient. LEVINE: Um, so, uh, did they keep any qualities or ways about them once they came here that were typical of Finnish people in Finland? MASALIN: Well, I imagine so, because they ended up in going back to Finland in 1939. LEVINE: Oh, uh-huh. MASALIN: Because we, the children had gotten married, and they were left by themselves, and they didn't know the language. And my mother's brother started writing to them, and wanting them to come back. So they went back to Finland. LEVINE: I see. Well, um, were there any kinds of food that your mother prepared in Finland that you remember having eaten and liked or disliked as a little girl? MASALIN: Well, we always had coffee bread or (?), called. That was one of the things that we had for sweets. And she used to do her own bread baking because you didn't buy bread then. And, uh, well, she used to cook the turnip casserole that they have in the Finnish cookbooks here that I liked. And, of course, at Christmas it was a special thing to have prunes and rice cooked together and thickened, and that was a special treat, because we didn't have that much. So . . . LEVINE: Yeah. Well, um, so, um, it was your aunt who was a cook in New York City, who started writing to your mother saying, "Why don't you come?" And, uh, do you remember your mother and father's reason, or why it was that they did decide to come? MASALIN: Well, she wrote so much about it, and they thought, well, they might have a better life if they came. And when they came she did provide them with a little farm in Rockville where they lived. LEVINE: I see. Well, before we talk about here, tell me about leaving. Did your mother, uh, bring a lot of things? Do you remember anything that you or your family brought? MASALIN: Just clothing. That's all. LEVINE: Do you remember the luggage, what you were carrying, what you had in? MASALIN: Well, I think they had an old trunk that they had, if I can remember a little old trunk that they had. LEVINE: And how did you, uh, how did you get the tickets, and how did you get the, how was it arranged for you? MASALIN: Well, she sent them the tickets, my aunt. And, uh, so that's how we happened to come. LEVINE: And what was her name, this aunt? MASALIN: Lydia. LEVINE: Lydia. And did, um, so, do you remember actually leaving your . . . MASALIN: Yes. LEVINE: Do you remember your home, the place you lived in there? MASALIN: Yes, I can remember where it was. And, uh, we have been back here, now, I've been back to Finland. We saw the place where I left. LEVINE: Oh, really. Could you describe the house where you lived? MASALIN: Well, it was just a very small house, a log cabin. Well, we couldn't see it close there, but it was a log cabin. LEVINE: Do you remember inside what it was like when you were little? MASALIN: Well, there was a great, big room that we lived in, like, well, it was a family room, kitchen, whatever. Well, you had the fireplace in the corner. And then there was one room that was a bedroom on the side in the hall. There was a big hall, and then there was another, sort of like a utility room on the end, but that's all I can remember about it. And an open attic that we used to play in, so. LEVINE: And did, uh, you didn't have, like, did you grow any vegetables or have any livestock or animals? MASALIN: Well, we must have had a cow, because I can remember my mother milking a cow, but I don't remember anything about the gardens or anything else like that. We must have had something, but I don't remember. LEVINE: Was the cow sort of like a pet, or the cow was . . . MASALIN: Well, it served the purpose of having milk. LEVINE: I mean, like, would you name the cow? Would it be like a . . . MASALIN: No, I don't remember that. LEVINE: Um, so, let's see. Uh, so when you were getting ready to leave, do you remember how you felt about coming, or . . . MASALIN: Well, of course, when you're that age you don't have that much choice whether you're coming or going. You go with the flow. ( she laughs ) LEVINE: Right. MASALIN: But the only thing I can remember about it, my aunt being very upset. She, she was a very pretty woman at that age, and just pink and white and blonde hair, and I can always remember her crying so. LEVINE: And, so when you were leaving, do you remember the actual departure, leaving the house and . . . MASALIN: Yes, I can remember that. They took us in a sleigh to wherever they took us, but I don't remember where they took us. Although it says here that we left from Hanko. LEVINE: How do you spell it? MASALIN: Hanko. H-A-N-K-O. That's along the coast somewhere there in Finland. LEVINE: So you took a boat from there to where? MASALIN: To, uh, Asturia [ph]. That's another name of a place. And I've written here I can remember that the boat leaked. LEVINE: Really! MASALIN: And it wasn't a very happy experience. ( she laughs ) From there . . . LEVINE: Can you, do you remember that boat? MASALIN: Well, I can just remember the inside, and the people telling that it was leaking. LEVINE: Was it like a big boat or not, or how many people were on it? MASALIN: Oh, it was a pretty good-sized boat. I wouldn't say it was a big steamer like what we came over in. But, see, that boat just took us to Howell [ph], and then we went from Howell [ph] to Liverpool, England. LEVINE: I see. MASALIN: And there was an icebreaker on the boat. I can remember the ice crushing around the boat because, you know, to be able to move. LEVINE: Huh. MASALIN: And then we went on the big steamer. It was the White Star Line. The boat's name was Celtic. It has three smokestacks. That I can remember. And, of course, we were in steerage, so you couldn't see the ocean. But the sailors rigged up a swing, so that my brother and I could swing high enough so we could see the ocean. LEVINE: You mean the swing was in the steerage? MASALIN: No, no, out on the deck there. But, see, the deck, the sides were so high that you couldn't see the ocean, so they rigged up something for swings for us. And then they would swing us high enough so we could see the ocean, and they'd also bring us apples. I can remember how pretty and red they were, because you weren't used to having apples. And, uh, and then from there I can remember seeing the Statue of Liberty, because everybody stood around the rail, you know, watching for that. But, uh . . . LEVINE: Could you describe what steerage was like? MASALIN: Well, you slept in bunks, one on top of the other, and, uh, of course, it wasn't all that pleasant. I can remember it being a bit smelly, with everybody all cramped in there, one on top of another. But it didn't have too many facilities to keep clean and stuff, but we made it. LEVINE: How about food? MASALIN: Well, all I can remember about the food was that it was very spicy, and a youngster doesn't care for too-spicy food when they're not used to it. So . . . LEVINE: So all this was new to you. MASALIN: Oh, yes. LEVINE: Going to England, and getting on the boat. MASALIN: Oh, yes, oh, yes. LEVINE: Do you remember things that struck you at the time as really different and . . . MASALIN: Well, I don't know. I guess I just didn't have any idea what I was getting into and just, like I say, go with the flow. LEVINE: So when the boat came into the New York Harbor, you remember . . . MASALIN: I remember seeing the Statue of Liberty, because everybody was hollering and, you know, saying that it was there. And, uh, being excited. LEVINE: And did you go up on deck to see that? MASALIN: Yeah, we were all around the deck there, you know, everybody, I guess, that could move and get there. LEVINE: And, let's see. So, uh, then you came to Ellis Island. MASALIN: Yes. LEVINE: And what was your impression of that? MASALIN: Well, all I can remember about that is standing in line and getting your inoculations. ( she laughs ) Because they were all herded in like cattle almost. ( she laughs ) So, that's about all I can remember of that. LEVINE: Do you remember how long you were there? MASALIN: No, I don't remember how long we were there. LEVINE: Anything else about Ellis Island that you can . . . MASALIN: No. All I remember, it was cold and, you know, we had our coats on and waiting in line, so. LEVINE: Do you remember what you wore to come to this country? MASALIN: No. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Okay. So, um, so after you were, got your inoculation and you left Ellis Island, then what? MASALIN: Then, uh, we went by boat to Fall River. And then from there by train to Rockland. And I guess we arrived in Rockland on the 23rd of March, 23. And there was lots of snow. And so my uncle and one of my cousins came after us in a sleigh, one of those low sleighs, and it was, had mattresses in the bottom and black quilts on top there to keep us warm. And, of course, the horses pulled the sleigh. There wasn't the traffic that you have now. I can remember going like bumps over the road, you know. And landing in my West Rockport with my aunt. LEVINE: Now, it was your, it was your Aunt Lydia who worked in New York, who sent the tickets? MASALIN: Yes. But it was another aunt that was living in West Rockport at the time. Her name was Olga Star. LEVINE: O-L-G-A? MASALIN: Yes. LEVINE: Uh-huh. And that, these were both your mother's sisters? MASALIN: My father's sisters. LEVINE: Your father's, uh-huh. So, um, when you first got here, did you start school right away? MASALIN: Uh, very soon. We went to West Rockport to school. And in Finland you wore aprons over your clothes, so I go to school with aprons and braids, looking like a real old hick, naturally, from the old country, so the kids all made a lot of fun of me. A lot of fun. I didn't know one word of English. And I can always remember the first words I learned, the teacher gave me a ruler and told me to point to what she said, or wrote on the blackboard, and it was "right there." She told me to say "right there," if I knew what she was referring to. LEVINE: So your first words were "right there." MASALIN: "Right there." LEVINE: So how was learning English? Do you remember any either problems or breakthroughs when you were learning? MASALIN: Well, I guess it wasn't too bad. I got through eight grades in six years, so it couldn't have been too bad. LEVINE: Did the children, were there other immigrant children in your school? MASALIN: My brother, Ane [ph]. He went to school when I did. And then from there, of course, we went to Rockville School the next year, where we had the place in Rockville. By that time I was not wearing aprons any more. LEVINE: Were there any customs that, uh, your mother, um, either adopted in this country or kept from the old country that you can recall? MASALIN: I don't know, because it was all the same to me at that time, so. LEVINE: Yeah. Now, so there was a Finnish community here when you came? MASALIN: Yes, there were a lot of Finns around West Rockport, a lot. LEVINE: And would you get together? MASALIN: Yes. They had a, like a community hall in West Rockport, and they used to have dances there, and they used to have picnics in Union, and even in West Rockport there. So we used to go to the dances and the get-togethers. LEVINE: Do you remember if the attitude among the Finnish community was to become Americanized? MASALIN: Oh, yes. LEVINE: Or to hold onto the Finnish ways? MASALIN: Oh, no. They all had plans of being Americanized. LEVINE: Do you think your mother and father were happy they had come? MASALIN: Well, they probably were while we were growing up there. But then my brother got married, and my other brother got married, I got married. Well, because I had to go to work and make my own living when I was fifteen. I didn't stay around home very long, and I couldn't go to high school. They couldn't afford to buy me the clothes to go. The superintendent of the school found me a place in Rockport that I could have worked my board, but they couldn't afford to buy me the clothes to go, so I didn't go to high school. LEVINE: Hmm. Was your father a carpenter here? MASALIN: No. No, they had a few blueberries on the land and, yes, I guess he did do some carpentry work here. LEVINE: And, um, how about your brothers? What did they do? MASALIN: Well, my oldest brother went to work in the quarries in Rockland. And my younger brother moved to Fitchburg, so he was, he was a machinist, wasn't he? ( voice off mike ) Yeah. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Now, how would, I see, so he was a little older than you are. MASALIN: He was five years older. And my other brother was fifteen years older than I. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Were you closest, close to one of them, or both of them? MASALIN: Well, yes. Because my older brother was so much older, but my younger brother, we were close. We still are. I saw him Christmas this year with my daughters, and it was good because we don't either one of us drive very far any more, and hadn't seen one another for a couple of years, so it was nice to see him. LEVINE: Um, let's see. So, uh, you went to work at fifteen, and what were you doing? MASALIN: Doing housework. LEVINE: Right around here? MASALIN: Rockland. LEVINE: Rockland. And then did you keep doing that, or did you change what you did? MASALIN: No. I did housework until I was nineteen when I was married. LEVINE: And who did you marry? MASALIN: I married Jalo Ranta. J-A-L-O, R-A-N-T-A. LEVINE: Is that a Finnish name? MASALIN: Yes. LEVINE: And was he also from Finland? MASALIN: No. He was born on the St. George Row. But he was of Finnish descent. ( a clock chimes ) LEVINE: And did you have children? MASALIN: Yes. We had two daughters. LEVINE: And their names? MASALIN: The oldest one is Helen, Helen Sylvia. And the younger one is Joan Eileen. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Do they have married names? MASALIN: Oh, yes. They, Helen's name now is DeShon. LEVINE: I'm sorry, could you . . . MASALIN: D-E-S-H-O-N. And June's name is Wilcox, W-I-L-C-O-X. LEVINE: And how about grandchildren? MASALIN: Oh, I have grandchildren. I have great-grandchildren. Uh-huh. We have three grandsons, one granddaughter, and we have three great-granddaughters and one great- grandson. LEVINE: Great. And, uh, then, um, you, uh, you were at home raising your children? MASALIN: Yes. LEVINE: And then did you work after that at all? MASALIN: Oh, yes. I worked in a fish plant packing fish. LEVINE: In Rockland? MASALIN: Uh-huh. I also did alterations for a clothing shop in Rockland, Lucien Greens, for years. And then I lost my first husband. So then I really had to dig in. So I went to work in a nursing home doing occupational therapy. And that was not a very good move, because I was still sad for myself, and every time something happened to one of them I was crying for them and I was crying for myself. So a friend of mine said, "Why don't you go to work in the hospital?" Uh, they needed a ward secretary. I said I had no schooling. They said, "Well, go see anyway." So I went to see the supervisor. And she said, "Give them two weeks notice, and come in." I worked there for six years. LEVINE: And did you like that? MASALIN: Yes, I liked that. But then I was getting older, I was sixty-one, I was getting kind of tired, and the hospital changed, they had a new building, and there was going to be a lot of changes. And I thought, well, maybe I'll retire. And the cook from the nursing home saw me, and she says, "Why don't you come over and work there for a little while, maybe part-time?" So I thought, well, that might work for a little while. So I went to see the manager, and he says, "You can come in and make your own time." So I did that until this fellow come along. And he thought maybe we'd better get married. ( they laugh ) LEVINE: So, but you knew each other from . . . MASALIN: Oh, yes. LEVINE: From what? From . . . MASALIN: Oh, way back when we were young and used to go to the dances and things. Because his parents were Finnish, and my parents were Finnish. They knew one another. So that's what happened, eighteen years ago. ( they laugh ) LEVINE: So you're, Mr. Masalin's first name? MASALIN: Viljo, V-I-L-J-O. LEVINE: Okay. And, uh, what would you say you're most proud of that you've done? MASALIN: Well, I don't know. What would I be proud of? I don't know. Surviving, I guess. ( they laugh ) LEVINE: Yeah, uh-huh. So it was, there were rough times. MASALIN: Oh, sure. LEVINE: When you came here. What do you think difference it has made? What difference do you think it's made to you having been born in Finland, coming here as a young, as a child, and growing up and spending your life here. What, do you think that made a difference in sort of the person you are, or . . . MASALIN: Oh, I imagine so. I don't know what I would have been if I had stayed over there, I'm sure. Because I'm naturalized, I have naturalization papers. Oh, applied from when I was eighteen. I must have been twenty-one, probably, when I got my naturalization papers. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Did you ever consider going back? MASALIN: No. We've been back here, and I've been back to visit three times. The last time to my grandson's wedding. He married a Finnish exchange student. So . . . LEVINE: Do you like the fact that the Finnish part of you is kept alive in the family in that way? MASALIN: Yes, very pleased. And I'm very pleased that they've started this Finn-Am Society to keep some of the heritage, culture, or whatever you want to call it, alive. LEVINE: Yeah, why don't you say something about that for the tape? MASALIN: Well, they started that last summer, and they really come a long way with it, you know, since then. They meet every, like I say, every other month, the third Tuesday of the month. And, uh, they're very enthusiastic. I had no idea there were so many Finnish people, and second and third generation noes that were so interested in keeping in touch with the Finnish culture. So they really are doing a very good job about it. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO LEVINE: And how about this time in your life? How is this phase for you? MASALIN: Well, very good. ( she laughs ) Very comfortable. I've got somebody to stay with. So it's very good. And have a few friends left, because they're dropping by the wayside at this age. LEVINE: Yeah, uh-huh. Well, is there anything else that you can think of about coming to this country and living your life out here? Why don't you say something, maybe, about why it was your parents then decided to go back? MASALIN: Well, like I say, they got left by themselves, and they couldn't speak the language. And so they thought it would be easier for them if they went back where they could speak the language. But, um, because they were, you know, a little older when they came, so they didn't learn the language. LEVINE: And so your, their children had grown, and they were . . . MASALIN: Well, you see, my brother was, if I was eight and my brother was five years older than I, my other brother was fifteen years older than I when they came, so they were pretty well grown up at that time. LEVINE: Yeah. Okay. Is there anything else that you can think of that you'd like to say before we close? MASALIN: Well, I don't know. Except that I have a lovely family. LEVINE: Okay. MASALIN: Which I'm very proud of. LEVINE: Good. Well, I want to thank you very much. It's been very nice talking with you, and I want to thank you. I've been talking with Mrs. Helmi Masalin. I'm in Camden, Maine. It's December 30, 1993, and this is Janet Levine for the National Park Service, and I'm signing off.