MOORE: Good afternoon. This is Kate Moore for the National Park Service, and today is the 30th of July, 1994. And I'm in Columbus, Ohio at the home of William McGuire, who came to the U.S. from Scotland, and arrived December 10, 1928 when he was seven years old. Why don't you begin by giving us your full name and date of birth, please? McGUIRE: My full name is William A. McGuire. I live at 889 Chestershire Road. I was born in Blantyre, Scotland in 1921, January 27th. MOORE: Okay. And what size town was the town you were born in? McGUIRE: The town was very, very small, three to five thousand people. MOORE: And what was the town's name again? McGUIRE: Blantyre. B-L-A-N-T-Y-R-E. MOORE: And what the major industry of that town? McGUIRE: Coal. There were a lot of coal mines. MOORE: You can turn that up. ( addressing the sound engineer ) Sorry, we're making a little break here. Turn up that number here up a little bit so it'll be a little higher. All right, it was a coal town. And what did the town look like? How would you describe it? McGUIRE: Well, I was kind of young at the time, and I could describe it with one thing. There was a railroad going through the town, and all it hauled was coal. MOORE: What was your father's name? McGUIRE: My father's name was William. MOORE: Okay. And what was his occupation? McGUIRE: Coal miner. MOORE: Coal miner. And how would you describe what your father looked like? McGUIRE: My father was a, right around a hundred and forty-three to a hundred and forty-seven pounds. He wasn't very big. He was about five foot seven, five foot eight tall. And they, until he went into the army in World War One, he was a good-looking man, and I think that's why my mother married him. MOORE: And so when you say until World War One, then what happened? McGUIRE: World War One he went to, he got, the shrapnel exploded in his face, and he went to Ireland back in 1916, and he was in the hospital for two years. MOORE: And is there an anecdote, what about your father's personality and temperament, sorry. His personality, what would you say? McGUIRE: Oh, he had a better personality than me. He could get along with people very well. MOORE: ( she laughs ) And is there a story about your father that you associate with your childhood? McGUIRE: Other than what my dad, when it rained he was a landscape gardener in America, and if it didn't, if it rained he didn't work. And I could tell by the way my mother acted that no money, no food. MOORE: And what was your mother's name? McGUIRE: My mother's name was Margaret Jane. MOORE: Her maiden name? McGUIRE: Her maiden name was MacArthur. MOORE: MacArthur. McGUIRE: M-A-C-A-R-T-H-U-R. MOORE: And what was her occupation, if any? McGUIRE: She was a housewife, and when she come to America she did a lot of work, ironing, any type of work, to make a dollar. MOORE: And what did your mom look like? How would you describe her? McGUIRE: She's still Mom, a, when she was younger, she was a good-looking woman. MOORE: And what color hair and eyes did she have? McGUIRE: Oh, I suppose it would be brown hair and blue eyes. MOORE: And what about her personality and temperament? McGUIRE: Oh, she had a good personality, but she could get mad. MOORE: ( she laughs ) Okay. And is there a story about your mother that you associate with your childhood, any anecdote about her? McGUIRE: Not necessarily. MOORE: All right. What about brothers and sisters? McGUIRE: I had one brother, which he was the oldest. And I had two sisters, one of them is a, came down from Scotland with me, and I had one sister who was born in Columbus, Ohio, up on Weber Road. MOORE: Now, your brother's name is what? McGUIRE: My brother's name is John. MOORE: And he's how much older than you? McGUIRE: He's about eighteen, nineteen months older than I am. MOORE: And how about your sisters' names? McGUIRE: My sister Mary is deceased, and I've got a sister Catherine who lives, right now she lives in Sumont, Georgia. MOORE: And Mary was how much younger than you are? McGUIRE: Good question. I would say almost two years younger than I am. My wife could probably give better deals on it, but . . . MOORE: All right. Now, what do you remember about your house back in Glasgow? McGUIRE: The house in Glasgow, I lived with my grandfather and grandmother. MOORE: Did your whole family live with your grandparents? McGUIRE: That's a, the only thing I remember back in them times was that's where we lived, and my mother was in America, and my dad was in America. MOORE: And so they came first? McGUIRE: My dad came first, then my mother came to America, and she come back to Scotland and picked up her two children, three children, and went to America. MOORE: Okay. Now, what do you remember about your grandparents' house? What were their names besides Grandmother and Grandfather? McGUIRE: Well, their name was John and Katie. MOORE: And they were whose parents, then? McGUIRE: They were my dad's parents. MOORE: And what did your grandfather do for a living? McGUIRE: I could not tell you that. I think he was a coal miner, but at that time when we lived with him he didn't do nothing. I think he was retired. MOORE: All right. And, so, what about that house? What do you remember about it? How was it heated, for example? McGUIRE: Heated with coal, a coal fire. MOORE: And what type of house was it? McGUIRE: It was just a government house. MOORE: Was it made of, what material? McGUIRE: Uh, stone. MOORE: A stone house. McGUIRE: It was a stone house, and it was heated by coal. MOORE: How was it lit? McGUIRE: I presume it was electricity then. I know prior to that, before they ever got that, it had to be lit with other kind of fuel. MOORE: Uh-huh. And what about plumbing? Was it indoor toilets, outdoor toilets? McGUIRE: I cannot answer truthfully. MOORE: Okay. What about running water? Where'd you get your running water? Where'd you get the water? McGUIRE: I can't answer that, truthfully. MOORE: You were too small when you came. Okay, so do you remember any of the furniture and how many rooms were in the house or anything? McGUIRE: Boy, it was very small, a very small house. If they had three bedrooms, it would be big. MOORE: And how far from town was that? Was it in or out of town? McGUIRE: It was pretty close to town. There was only three or four stores around there that I remember. MOORE: And did your grandparents keep animals at all? McGUIRE: No. MOORE: And who did the cooking in your family back home in Scotland? Your grandmother? McGUIRE: My grandmother. MOORE: Did you help at all? McGUIRE: I don't remember that. MOORE: What was your favorite food? Do you remember that? McGUIRE: I don't remember that. MOORE: That's okay. And do you remember the kitchen back in that house at all, anything about the kitchen. McGUIRE: I do not remember that. MOORE: All right. Now, you said your father came first. Now, why did your father come here? McGUIRE: For betterment. I don't think that he enjoyed what he was doing. MOORE: And when he came here, how did he get here? Did anyone sponsor him? McGUIRE: My aunt and uncle, their name was another William, Bill Patterson and Katie Patterson, husband and wife. So they're the ones that they signed a paper to get him to America. MOORE: And who paid your father's passage, then? McGUIRE: I don't know exactly, I don't know if my mother, God rest her, if she was here she could give you all the answers. MOORE: But you think that, okay. So did they, your uncle and aunt helped you, right? McGUIRE: Oh, yeah. We lived with my uncle and aunt when we come to America. MOORE: Now, you were seven when you came over. Did you have any religious life back in Scotland when you came? McGUIRE: We were Catholics. MOORE: You were Catholics. And how did you, were you, did you go regularly to church, then? McGUIRE: Well, we went to church on Sundays, and we went to Catholic school. MOORE: What do you remember about school back in Scotland? McGUIRE: Well, I only went to, I think, the first grade. I don't remember too much about that. MOORE: Do you remember where that school was? McGUIRE: It was right next door to where the Catholic church was. MOORE: And what was that address that your grandparents lived? Do you remember that? McGUIRE: Oh, I know it was Auchenraith Road. I used to know the number, but . . . MOORE: Tell me how you spell Auchenraith. McGUIRE: I think it was A-U-C-H-R-O. ( he addresses his wife ) Do you remember? That's what it was, Auchenraith Road. Too bad my memory isn't that good. MOORE: No, that's not that bad. You're not doing badly at all. Okay, so in school, you went to a Catholic school, you said. McGUIRE: That's right. MOORE: And did you wear uniforms to school? McGUIRE: No. We were taught by lay people. MOORE: Oh. McGUIRE: It was, and the government paid for the teachers back there. MOORE: Now, do you remember any games you played as a child in Scotland? McGUIRE: No, I couldn't remember that. MOORE: How about, we got to your father coming here. Now, when he came here, where did he come to? McGUIRE: Columbus, Ohio. MOORE: And what work did he first get? McGUIRE: A, I think the first job he got was a landscape gardener, working . . . MOORE: And how did he get that? McGUIRE: I have no idea how he got that. MOORE: And was he immediately given employment when he came here, or did he have to wait? McGUIRE: Oh, he, I think somebody else had to help him get employment. MOORE: Now, how long was he here before, what year did he leave? McGUIRE: That's a good question. I can't give you an answer on that one. MOORE: Did you remember your father? McGUIRE: No, I didn't remember my father. MOORE: Until you got here. McGUIRE: That's right. MOORE: So that you wouldn't have been able to recognize him. McGUIRE: That's correct. MOORE: Okay. And how about your mom? Do you remember when your mom left? McGUIRE: I remember when my mom left Scotland . . . MOORE: What year would that have been? McGUIRE: Oh, probably a year-and-a-half to two years before. That would be in 1926. MOORE: Uh-huh, 1926. Now, what about her leaving? Do you remember what she brought to pack with her and everything? McGUIRE: No, I don't. MOORE: You were small then. Okay. But you remember her coming back to get you? McGUIRE: She come back, we knew she would come back, and it broke my grandmother and grandfather's heart to see us leave. MOORE: How do you know that? McGUIRE: I was told by my mother. MOORE: I see. And do you remember leaving? McGUIRE: No. The only thing I remember is being on the boat. MOORE: Okay. Now, prior to the boat, do you remember packing? McGUIRE: No, I don't. MOORE: Do you remember, what did you know about the United States before you came here? McGUIRE: Nothing. ( a clock chimes in the background ) MOORE: What did your mom tell you, anything? McGUIRE: My mother didn't say very much. MOORE: Now, when your mom came over here to be with your father, they were married. McGUIRE: They were married. MOORE: And did she work? McGUIRE: Yes, she did housework. MOORE: For people. McGUIRE: For people. MOORE: And so she saved money. So who paid your fare over? McGUIRE: I couldn't honestly tell you the answer on that, but I think my parents saved money to bring the family here. MOORE: Okay. So you said you remembered the boat. How did you get to the boat? McGUIRE: I think it was by bus. That's only about ten miles from Blantyre to Glasgow, so we're pretty close. MOORE: So you went by bus. Do you remember saying goodbye to your grandparents? McGUIRE: No, I don't. MOORE: And do you remember seeing the boat for the first time? McGUIRE: No. MOORE: What do you remember about the boat, then? McGUIRE: It was the best place I ever ate in my life. ( he laughs ) MOORE: ( she laughs ) So you liked the food. McGUIRE: The food was good. MOORE: And all you could eat? McGUIRE: All the ice cream I could eat. I remember that, as a young fellow. I did get my brother sick by feeding him chocolate ice cream, and to this day he don't like it very well. MOORE: Chocolate ice cream he won't eat. ( she laughs ) So what else do you remember? Do you remember the food? How was it given to you? Was it the . . . McGUIRE: It's a table. MOORE: And was the table, was it a tablecloth, or a bare table, or . . . McGUIRE: I don't really remember. But you know that we ate well. MOORE: And everybody did? McGUIRE: Everybody. MOORE: So what about your accommodations? Do you remember where you slept on the boat? McGUIRE: No, I do not remember that. MOORE: So you remember through your stomach a little bit. ( they laugh ) Anyway, okay. What about, do you remember the ocean at all? McGUIRE: I was comparing the ocean to the last trip I was overseas, and I do remember the waves were awful high. MOORE: When you went over? McGUIRE: No, when we come back to America. MOORE: When was that? McGUIRE: I'm talking about 1927, I believe it is. MOORE: Oh, your first voyage over, you're talking about. McGUIRE: Yeah. MOORE: Now, was it very stormy, was it, or just . . . McGUIRE: Well, all the waves were high. So the last time I was over, how did I go, I went over by a, the Queen Mary this last trip, and I did see it a few years later out in San Diego. There was waves awful high. MOORE: Now, when you were on that boat the first time over, coming here, was there anything you'd never seen before that you remember? McGUIRE: No. I can't remember that. MOORE: Were you sick at all? McGUIRE: No, I was just the lucky one. I didn't get sick. My poor brother did. ( he laughs ) MOORE: Your older brother got sick? McGUIRE: Oh, yeah. MOORE: How about your mom? McGUIRE: Well, it didn't seem to bother her, but I guess I'm the only one that didn't get sick. MOORE: And, okay. So you were on the boat. Do you remember any entertainment on the boat? McGUIRE: I do know that women and men danced. I remember that part. MOORE: And do you remember seeing any fish or things on the ocean? McGUIRE: No. MOORE: Were there any, did anyone, any mishaps on the boat, anyone die or anything? McGUIRE: No, not that I know of. MOORE: How about the accommodations? You said you didn't remember that. Did your mother ever say what class you came on? McGUIRE: No, she never did. MOORE: So the port you left from was Glasgow. McGUIRE: Glasgow, Scotland. MOORE: And the boat's name was the . . . McGUIRE: Well, here it is. MOORE: It's on the other side, isn't it? McGUIRE: Yeah, S.S. Caledonia. MOORE: The Caledonia. All right. So what do you remember next for the boat. You remember about the food, you remember about your brother getting sick. What else do you remember? McGUIRE: Oh, other than that there was a, seemed like a long time. MOORE: Do you remember ever seeing the Statue of Liberty? McGUIRE: No. MOORE: Right. Do you remember, did you have a medical examination before you left? McGUIRE: I couldn't tell you that. MOORE: So this part is all hazy to you, except for the eating on the boat, that is hazy. Okay, so you were going, do you remember how you got to Columbus. Do you remember anything about Ellis Island or anything? McGUIRE: I think we come to Columbus by train. MOORE: Now, before that, getting off the boat and going through Ellis Island, do you remember anything? McGUIRE: No. MOORE: Okay. You remember the train to Columbus? McGUIRE: Well, I got on a train, and we got here, and we were taken to my aunt and uncle's house. MOORE: And you remember that? McGUIRE: Yeah. MOORE: And what do you remember about the train trip, anything? McGUIRE: Very little. MOORE: Okay. Now, you remember coming to your aunt and uncle's house. Now, where do you they live? McGUIRE: They lived in Columbus here. As a matter of fact, on this side of town, Floral Avenue, where they lived. MOORE: And this side of town is the west? McGUIRE: The west side. MOORE: The west side of town. Now, what type of house did they live in? McGUIRE: Oh, they lived in a big house. MOORE: And was it, what was it made of? McGUIRE: Wood. MOORE: A wooden house? Did they own the house, or did they . . . McGUIRE: I don't know whether they did or didn't. That's a good question. I don't know whether they owned it or not. MOORE: Okay. So you came here and when you got here where did your mother and father live? McGUIRE: My mother and father lived in the north end. They had a place where, he worked for (?) Gardens Nursery, and they had a two- or three-bedroom house there, and that's where they were living. MOORE: And were you going to live there, too? McGUIRE: After a while we did live there. MOORE: Now, where's, do you remember going to school for the first time? McGUIRE: The first time I ever went to school was Highland Avenue School, ( a vehicle going by on the outside can be heard on the recording ) which was on Highland Avenue here on the west side. MOORE: And were you ever teased for being a foreigner? McGUIRE: Oh, yeah, yeah. You always get that teasing, but just like I did, they asked me to say the alphabet. I thought I knew the alphabet. The only trouble is, when you get down to the last letter, in Scotland the last letter was Zed instead of Z. But other than that I went there to school for a year, and they, my brother went to the same place. But other than that they, he got a country where you got people begging to get in right today, and I don't know that people want to get into America right today. They didn't fight for their country, so if we ever had a war there, I wouldn't even fight for our country. I'm real bitter about that, because I wasn't a citizen when I was put in the army, but the way I'm feeling, if you love America, defend it. MOORE: Well, when we get back to, you were a little too little then to defend it. You were seven years old or so in school. McGUIRE: Oh . . . MOORE: Were there other little Scottish kids there, too? McGUIRE: No. MOORE: You were the only one? McGUIRE: The only one. MOORE: Were there other nationalities in your school that had just come over? McGUIRE: I don't remember that. MOORE: Now, how did your mom and dad adjust to life here? How did they feel about living here? McGUIRE: I think my mother could get along with anybody. MOORE: And were they pretty, how did they feel about their decision to come here, then? McGUIRE: I think my mother always appreciated America, and she did one little thing. She give her kids something to look forward to later on in life. It really was, I think it's, you can't understand it until you see other countries. MOORE: Now, when you were little, did you ever experience hunger here in the United States? McGUIRE: Oh, the hunger was my own fault. ( he laughs ) When I was about eight or nine I walked ten miles and, that's an awful thing to say when you don't have anything to eat after you walk that far, you do get hungry. MOORE: But in general you had food on the table? McGUIRE: Oh, we always had food on the table. MOORE: Now, your father worked as a landscape architect, so I might say gardener. And did he continue to have work most of his life? McGUIRE: Oh, yes, but then we had the Depression and that, and they, he did work for the government, WPA, PWA and you can see one of the things we did out here was he was a foreman on the job that they got on West Gate and (?) Road. And they built a great big interchange in there, and it's still there, and they never did anything with it since they built that. And, see, jobs like that that the government got into did a wonderful thing for America. MOORE: And so the job corps, I mean, that organization of getting people to work at that time, you thought was a good idea. McGUIRE: Oh, I really think it was. It was, the job corps didn't come until Kennedy got in. MOORE: And before that the name that you gave, yes, I know, I'm familiar with it. Okay. Now, what about your religious life? Did you continue that in this country? McGUIRE: We still become, but we were still Catholics. MOORE: Did you worship as much as you did back home? McGUIRE: I don't remember that. I think we did later on in life. MOORE: What was your favorite holiday? McGUIRE: ( he pauses ) I think it was the Fourth of July. At one time my dad worked for the Washington Brewery, and we didn't have a car, and they come picked us up in a big truck and took us up to a Oak Park which was on the north end, and they did do one thing, they gave you all the Seven-Up that you can drink. Washington Brewery was owned by the Seven-Up Company at that time. And the men got all the beer they wanted to drink, but it was a fun day to remember. MOORE: Now, did you bring anything from Scotland that your family kept, any keepsakes at all, or anything that you still miss? McGUIRE: Not that I know of. MOORE: How about pictures and artifacts like that? McGUIRE: This is the only picture. ( he presents the photo ) MOORE: The one of you and your brother and sister. McGUIRE: Yeah. I got a picture of my died. And I don't think we've got a picture of my mother. I don't remember. MOORE: Now, tell me a little bit about your life. Now, you went through the American school system. How far did you go through school then? McGUIRE: High school. MOORE: You went to high school. And did, what was your favorite subject in school? McGUIRE: I didn't have a favorite subject. MOORE: All right. And what did, then what did you do professionally? What did you, when you were in high school, what did you go to work immediately after? McGUIRE: Immediately after I went to work for A&P Bakery. MOORE: And did you learn to be a baker? McGUIRE: No, I learned, I was in the shipping department. I learned how to work forty hours and do most of it in one or two days. We used to work three or four hours on Sunday and Monday, and on Wednesday and Thursday we'd get the remainder of our hours in to get a forty- hour week. But prior to that, I was there for, oh, a couple of years, then I went to work for the High Bell Telephone Company. MOORE: And what did you do there? McGUIRE: Well, I started out in the line department. I did that for a year. Then I went to the cable department. Then Uncle Sam got me. ( he laughs ) And I went to work for the phone company for one reason, because they had a pension plan, and I didn't have anything like that at the bakery. And they, then they, I was there a year. Being there a year, when you go into the service, they give you three months' salary, so I did that, and I was drafted into the army and they, a month later I become a citizen down in Jacksonville, Florida. So I spent thirty-nine months in the Pacific. MOORE: In World War Two? McGUIRE: World War Two. And I saw a lot of war. ( they laugh ) MOORE: What branch were you in? McGUIRE: I was in the signal department, the Signal Corps. MOORE: And after that what did you do, after World War Two? McGUIRE: I come back to the phone company. MOORE: Now, when did you get married? McGUIRE: Do I have to tell that? MOORE: Yeah, you're supposed to talk about important things here, if that is important. McGUIRE: I got married in 1950. MOORE: So you waited till after the war? McGUIRE: I waited till after the war, and I got a, do you want me to say it, it's the best thing I ever did in my life. But we got married in 1950, and we got three boys and three girls. MOORE: And when were your children born? McGUIRE: I'd have to ask my wife that. MOORE: You had three boys and three girls. First three boys, and then three girls? McGUIRE: No, no, in between. MOORE: All right. What are your children's names? Do you have to ask? McGUIRE: I do know that. MOORE: Okay, good. ( they laugh ) Okay. What are the children's names? McGUIRE: William was the oldest. MOORE: The oldest is William. McGUIRE: Marie is second, Mary is third, and John is fourth, and Margaret, and then Patrick, so that's a bundle. MOORE: That's a bundle all right. McGUIRE: And to be honest with you, their mother raised a nice bunch of children. MOORE: Now, how did you meet your wife? McGUIRE: Hmm. Oh, I got to tell that one? ( Ms. Moore laughs ) I called her up for a date. I found out she had tickets to the Ohio State football game. MOORE: So you asked her out so you could go to the game? McGUIRE: Well, yeah. So she had tickets, so we went to the football game. We went to a couple of them. So three years later we got married, give or take a few years. MOORE: Now . . . END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO MOORE: Now, how do you, is there anything that was from your Scottish background, any of the customs or anything, do you keep in your life? McGUIRE: No. Really I don't. MOORE: What about your children? Were they interested at all in Scotland? McGUIRE: I don't think so. I'd have to ask my wife. ( Mrs. McGuire speaks off mike ) MOORE: Would your children like to visit Scotland? McGUIRE: My wife says yes, but I think that . . . MOORE: And how often did you go back home? McGUIRE: I've been to Scotland once. MOORE: And when was that? McGUIRE: Hmm, 1965. I went back with my mother. So we did go back a week, ten days, something like that. And then they, I did go back with my wife to Germany. I had a boy over in Germany in the army. MOORE: Now, how was it to go back to Scotland after all those years? McGUIRE: Well, I look back at it and I say, I never saw America, and I haven't. I still haven't saw America, and I'm seventy-three years old, and I still haven't saw. I still say people ought to see their own country, and I say America is my country. MOORE: Uh-huh. And did you think your parents thought it was a good decision to come here, then? McGUIRE: Oh, very much. MOORE: So you think of yourself first as an American. McGUIRE: That is correct. MOORE: But you still can think of yourself as Scottish, too? McGUIRE: Not necessarily. I think that America has got so much over these countries, and that's why all these other people, they all want to come to America. And I still say they ought to go through channels like I had to. They ought to have somebody sign a piece of paper that would allow them in here so they do not, and the reason that people years ago come to America, was so that they wouldn't be on welfare. That's why people signed papers for them to come. MOORE: Uh-huh. Now, you went back to Ellis Island, you said, to see. McGUIRE: Yes, I went. MOORE: What was your opinion about that? McGUIRE: I thought it was a fabulous job. I thought that the halls looked like they were when I went through it. But as young as I was I don't really remember. But I can see all the hardships that people coming over to America went through to get into America. I saw some of the tragic things, and some of the goods that people brought back. It's a hard thing to realize that people would leave everything and come here. MOORE: Now, you lived a lot. You've lived in two countries, and you've been abroad to the United States and the, you know, Pacific and that. What would you give as advice to young people today if you were giving advice about living this long and seeing what you've seen? McGUIRE: I still think our young people today should have to go in the military for at least a year. They got to have regimentation. MOORE: Girls and boys? McGUIRE: Yes. Your girls want to take everything away from the men today, so let them have the responsibility. MOORE: I'd like to thank you on behalf of Ellis Island for helping us out. McGUIRE: Okay. MOORE: And we'll send you a copy of this, too. And this is Kate Moore signing off in Columbus, Ohio with William McGuire for the Ellis Island Oral History Project on July 30, 1994.