SIGRIST: Good afternoon, this is Paul Sigrist for the National Park Service. Today is Tuesday, May fourteenth, 1991. We are here in New Milford, New Jersey with Estelle Belford, who came from Roumania in 1905 when she was five years old. Good afternoon. Mrs. Belford, could you please give me your full name, including your maiden name, and your date of birth. BELFORD: Estelle Schwartz Belford. What else? SIGRIST: And your birthdate. BELFORD: March 5, 1900. SIGRIST: O.K. And where were you born? BELFORD: I was born in Roumania. I do not remember the name of the little, what we used to call a "shetel," a little town. SIGRIST: Could you spell that please? BELFORD: Shetel is S-H-E-T-E-L. It's really like a small village and we lived there 'til I was five years old. SIGRIST: Can you describe this little village for me, please? BELFORD: Well, there really weren't any houses there. They were really more or less huts and from what my mother described to us or what I faintly remember there were about three rooms and we all lived in the three rooms. One large room which was a kitchen and a dining room and one child slept there and then there was a bedroom and that was the size of the house, actually. SIGRIST: What was the house made out of? BELFORD: Was, what do you call it, wood. SIGRIST: Was it wood? BELFORD: It was wood. Yeah, the house was wood and my mother had a cow and made her own butter, her own milk. Milk the cow, make her own butter, her own cheese and stores were very far, very far apart. They had to go to another village to go to a doctor or to really be in contact with other people. SIGRIST: Did you have a garden with this house? BELFORD: She had grounds. They really didn't call it a "garden." They had grounds around it and they grew just a little vegetables, not much. They had an outhouse and no running water. The well was quite a distance away and I remember my mother saying, always coming to argue with my older brother, "Somebody has to go get a pail of water," and this one wanted to go and the other one didn't want to go and there was always a fuss in the house. And the stove in the house was, I remember faintly, like it was built in the wall, like a big brick thing and there was always something cooking on it. And, uh... SIGRIST: What kinds of things did you eat? BELFORD: No canned stuff, no fruits, no canned or anything like that. It was all homemade things. My mother made her own bread, her own cake, her own jellies or jams. They'd go out, further out into the village where she would tell us they grow berries or so and pick them and make jellies or jams. It was mostly the kind of cooking, the kind of food they had there was mostly homemade things. A lot of corn meal. That part of the country they're known for mostly corn meal. They call it in Jewish "mamalago." SIGRIST: Can you spell that, please? BELFORD: Mamalago? SIGRIST: M-A..? BELFORD: M-A-M-A-L-A-G-O, I guess. SIGRIST: I see. BELFORD: Mamalago. And they used to cook that like a porridge and they'd have it with milk in the morning or they wanted, or she made a pot roast in the afternoon. She'd cook that and put the gravy of the pot roast over it. That was like a side dish. Very little vegetables. Very little. SIGRIST: Where did you get your meat? BELFORD: There was a butcher in town. He would go into the village like once a week or so and people had to give him the order before he went in because there was no ice boxes. There was no things they can keep the things in so she bought the meat there and I remember also that when they wanted to store anything, any food, they'd go down the cellar and they'd store it down there. We also had a little attic and they kept things up there, nuts and stuff like that. But the living was very poor. SIGRIST: You said you had a cow. Did you have a barn? BELFORD: No, they had no barn. The cow was just there. SIGRIST: Any other animals? BELFORD: No, no other animals and later on I remember they sold the cow. My mother had to get milk from a neighbor or so which was far away. SIGRIST: Did the cow have a name? BELFORD: No. They just called it "Cow." They did. They called it "Cow." And that was the living. Very, very poor and, uh... SIGRIST: Since we've talked about your mother, what was her name? BELFORD: My mother's name was Yetta. SIGRIST: Could you spell that please? BELFORD: Y-E-T-T-A. SIGRIST: And tell me a little bit about her background. BELFORD: My mother had no schooling. She was brought up in a little village like that. No education. A very good natured person. Very understanding of her children. She was very pretty. We had no mirrors in the house. One small mirror. But she was always very, uh, try to comb her hair just so when she always, and always taught us that we have to do the best we can and and we have to be the cleanest we can and she was always sweeping around. One thing she old us, I do not remember this, was when she wanted to sweep, we had a rough floor, she'd go outside in the back of the house and pick some grain. It wasn't grain, I don't know what it was. She picked something that was growing there in high stalks, tie them together and that's what she'd sweep the floor with and try to keep as clean as possible. When the baby was born they didn't have a carriage like they have here but they took a box, like a crate, and had four wheels on it. My brother would make the wheels or whatever it was and that was where they put the baby outside. That was the living there, very poor, very simple. And, uh... SIGRIST: Was her family from the same village? BELFORD: No, no. They came, she was born in a larger village and when she got married to my father they came here. He came from the small village. SIGRIST: He came from the town where you lived. BELFORD: Right. Close by, right. In those days the marriages were just made. They weren't, somebody knew him and somebody knew her and she was an orphan and he was just about working for some tailor and he knew her and to do something they got married. That was the way they got married in those days. SIGRIST: What was his name? BELFORD: Benjamin. And, uh... SIGRIST: What did he look like? BELFORD: My father was, uh, my mother was a good looking woman. My father was not. He idolized her and we children grew up idolizing her. She was everything to us because it was my mother. And he catered to her. Her word was, I won't saw "law" because she never used a harsh word either. I was brought up with parents that suffered a lot in their youth and when they got to this little village and they started living there or so they appreciated each other so much that there was so much compassion there. But my father idolized my mother. He thought and we children all felt the same way that we wouldn't dare go against her although she was not a demanding person. As I said before, she had no education and the life was very, very simple and very, very poor. And they, when somebody suggested to my father to come to America... SIGRIST: Now, you had brothers and sisters? BELFORD: I had two brothers and a sister and I was the baby. And my father, with an uncle of mine said, "Well," they heard about America. They heard it's a wonderful place, a lot of opportunities there. The living was so poor in Europe. There was no synagogue or temple that they really can go to and that was their life there. So my father and this uncle, having no money at all, figured they'd work their way through going to America. And they had to wait 'til one of the, uh, like the butcher, was going into the village that they went with him in order to get transportation and that's how they really traveled from one place to another. It was a miracle how they got here. SIGRIST: What year did your father come here? BELFORD: My father came here in 1902. SIGRIST: So you were just a baby. BELFORD: I was five. Oh yes, when he left I was a baby. He came here in 1902. Traveling was quite hard for them because they had to work their way through and they had a passport. An uncle of mine that was here in America previous to him sent him the passport but no money, naturally. And he came here and lived with this uncle, got a job and stayed with them. SIGRIST: What job did he get? BELFORD: My father was a furrier. SIGRIST: So he went right into the fur business when he first... BELFORD: No. In Europe he was a tailor and here he went into the fur line and he lived with this aunt and uncle who lived in four rooms on Houston Street in the East Side and I remember my father telling us he slept on the kitchen floor because they had other people staying there with them. And he accumulated some money and sent for my oldest brother. SIGRIST: What was his name? BELFORD: My brother's name was Sam and Sam was about seventeen years old at the time and Sam came here and lived with this aunt and uncle also and they accumulated money. Of course, they knew very little of the customs of America and one thing is kind of peculiar. When my father started working, I remember him telling us, and at the end of the week they gave him his check. They paid him and he didn't know what that was and he was ashamed to ask because whatever you asked you felt, you know, foolish or whatever it was. But he kept it. He thought it was a ticket of some kind and he waited about a month or so and he wasn't getting any money. Finally he asked somebody and then he realized that piece of paper is really money. And that's how, well, anyhow, they accumulated the money. My brother was here for two years with my father. SIGRIST: What job did your brother get? BELFORD: My brother worked in a tailoring, in a factory. He worked in a factory with skirts and jackets and, you know, yeah, tailoring, yeah. And he worked there and the two of them worked very hard and they saved every penny they can and they sent for my mother, my other brother, my sister and I and we, we had to get to the village also. Somebody gave us transportation. SIGRIST: Before we talk about getting over here... BELFORD: Yeah. SIGRIST: Let's talk a little bit about... BELFORD: Of Europe? SIGRIST: Of being a little girl in Europe and being without a father. What did "father" mean to you? You knew you had a father. BELFORD: I personally was too young. My father left, I was a little baby. I heard we had a father. I had a father. SIGRIST: Was there a photograph of him? BELFORD: No, they didn't have any. I remember one thing; my father missed me, naturally. I was the baby and my mother went ahead, this I remember distinctly, and she put ink on my hand and put it on a nice of paper and they sent that to my father. You know, there was no way of taking any pictures in those days there or anything like that. To him that was a very precious thing. And, uh, we didn't have any neighbors that the children play with. Everybody lived so far from one another. And, uh... SIGRIST: Was there any family, any extended family in this town? BELFORD: No, no, but they had friends. As I said there's a butcher and the green man, what they call the grocer, and the women would get together on Friday night sometimes or during the week or whatever it was. They were all, simple life, very, very simple. They were all busy with their cooking and their baking and that was the way their food, their provisions. They didn't have to go to a store and buy a bread or canned stuff or frozen stuff or anything like that. So that was, they helped each other in other ways. If anybody needed anything and, uh, that's about all I really remember. SIGRIST: You said there was no synagogue in town. BELFORD: No, there was no synagogue in town. There was no temple and, of course, they missed that an awful lot. SIGRIST: Did you carry on in your house? BELFORD: In the house, in the house, oh yes. In the house my mother lit her candles every Friday night and she said her prayers and on Saturday you don't do, no matter what work you did all week long on Saturday you don't do anything. You observe your Sabbath. And you had a few Jewish neighbors there that you got together with and at that time almost everybody had somebody going to America. So they had a lot in common. "Did you get a letter," or "Did you get a letter?" My mother couldn't read. She had no education at all, may she rest, she was a marvelous person. So when she got a letter she would go to he butcher. He was the one that read the letter for her and he was the one that used to write. And my father couldn't read too much either but he had someone read the letters here for him and that's how they lived. And we children had no schooling there. There was no schooling for the, so whatever education they had was like in Hebrew or in Jewish, so there was always an educated man in town that would come and give them lessons. There was no, as I said before, no schooling or anything like that. SIGRIST: So your older brothers and older sister, were they taught by this man? BELFORD: Yes, they were taught by this man. And as far as clothing was concerned there wasn't much getting new clothing or much, you know, some... SIGRIST: Did your mother make... BELFORD: No, my mother didn't do too much sewing. She didn't have a machine but people used to help us. Sometimes you would get a package from America that they sent us some things and very little. You don't remember going to a store and trying something on, you know what I mean? It was somebody gave you something and it was a very, very poor, simple life. SIGRIST: Do you remember a toy, a special toy that you had? BELFORD: No, no. I do not remember any toys. I do remember my mother took a towel, you know, and she put something inside to make the head and she tied a bow around it and that was the dress and that was my doll. I remember that distinctly. I remember in the kitchen we had, I don't know if you know what a "samovar" is? SIGRIST: Samovar, sure. BELFORD: Yeah, we had a samovar and that was our treat. We'd light the samovar on Friday nights, you know, and you'd have your tea. In fact you'd light it almost every night but Friday she'd polish it up and that was the way of celebrating your Sabbath, you know, with the candles along side it. And the food was, as I said before, very simple, very, very plain. Living was very, very plain. There was no such thing as going to a theatre or having a school play or having that kind of life. There was no such thing as that. SIGRIST: What did the town do for entertainment? Did they have a dance or music of some sort? BELFORD: No, no. If anybody wanted anything they went into a village. The town itself that I was born in was so small and so simple that they really didn't have anything. They had to go like to another town and if you had no transportation you just didn't go. Sometimes a few people would get together and go into it but it was very, very seldom. SIGRIST: Did this little village thing you grew up in ever experience any anti-Jewish activity? BELFORD: I didn't want to bring that up. SIGRIST: O.K., but it did? BELFORD: It did and that's the reason, well, I didn't know if I could bring that up. SIGRIST: By all means. BELFORD: That's the reason we didn't mingle with too many people. There were very few Jews there and the Jew was, uh, nobody made friends with him. He was just by himself. The butcher was Jewish and there was another little store that was Jewish, just three or four. The rest were not Jewish people. They didn't argue with them. They got along enough to say "hello" or so but they didn't mingle with them. My mother told us a story where one time they were notified the Cossacks were coming in and she would take us children and go out into the woods. She'd take the pillows, just the pillows and the blankets and they'd run out into the woods and they'd stay there and they'd hear shooting or whatever is there and when they came back to whosever house was there, you know, was still in contact inside or whatever they did, and quite a few of the Gentile people would say, "Where's your god? Your god allows this," you know, and things like that. My father worked for a man in town that was supposed to be like a constable. He was very, very lucky that this constable gave him this job. My father must have been a very good tailor and through him, through this constable, if anybody annoyed my mother and the children or so my father would tell him and he would tell them not to, you know. And also through this constable we had food. I didn't want to bring this up before. I didn't know if I could bring up the... SIGRIST: Sure. BELFORD: Many times when they had a party up there or celebrated something and had anything left over, so he'd give my father and, of course, he'd bring it down to us. And through this constable we led a little easier life. SIGRIST: You were very lucky. BELFORD: We were. We were the lucky ones because, as I said before, through him we lived a much easier life and that's about... SIGRIST: All right, let's talk about getting ready to come to America. Your father sent money over. BELFORD: I'd like to say something but... SIGRIST: Sure, go ahead. BELFORD: No, this is too, no. O.K. My father used to write these letters, as I said before. Is my son-in-law here? MRS. BELFORD'S SON-IN-LAW: Yeah. BELFORD: Oh, now he knows all about me. My father tried to describe to my mother and to us or to the people, friends, how you travel in America. He tried to describe an elevator. How can you describe an elevator? So he wrote that they have a whole lot of big boxes together and there's wheels there and it travels over the roofs of the houses. That was his description of the elevator. And you have stores here where you can go down and you can buy food and he tried to describe everything. Well, anyhow, after he accumulated the money and I remember getting on this here wagon with my mother and the children and they're driving us to a different place, a different town. SIGRIST: What sorts of things did you take with you? BELFORD: took with us, my mother took along her candlesticks. That was the main thing. She took along her samovar and just the clothing we had. She took along some bedding also, which, on the way, she had to get rid of. I really don't know why but the samovar she had to get rid of and the bedding. The candlesticks they let her keep. And I remember riding on this wagon to a certain cousin in a large town and that was the first time we saw houses built almost that you can see across from one house to another and everything was just wonderful. We stayed with this cousin for about two days. SIGRIST: Do you remember what town this is? BELFORD: (she pauses) It was near Bltz. No, I wouldn't remember the town but I know we that we passed, we stayed in a town by the name of Bltz for two days, also. SIGRIST: B-E-L-Z? BELFORD: B-L-T-Z. We stayed there for about two days also with somebody else that we knew and then they, I had an uncle there that was a politician and through him we were able to ride across the border because in those days you couldn't get out of that town, you know what I mean, and people really had to steal their way across or so. But we were able to ride across the border. And then we got to the seaport. SIGRIST: And what port was that? BELFORD: That was in, if I remember correctly, Rotterdam. No, Antwerp. SIGRIST: Antwerp. BELFORD: To Antwerp. And we stayed there only for about a day or so and then the, that was the first time my mother saw a lot of people in one room and she was telling us this story; that when she went into the ladies room and there was a lot of sinks there from what she described and mirrors, you know, and the toilets on the side. And we children were standing by the mirror. She came in and she saw us. She didn't see herself. She saw us in the mirror. She never saw a mirror before and she thought we were there and she started scolding us, "Come over here," and then she realized. She was very much embarrassed. My mother was a very, very sensitive person and all the way through if she made one mistake and people laughed then she wouldn't say another word. Anyhow, we got on ship. SIGRIST: What was the name of the boat? BELFORD: The Rotterdam. And we went steerage. I remember them taking us downstairs. SIGRIST: Can you describe your accommodations? BELFORD: It was, yes, because I remember that distinctly because my mother was very sick and there was a lot of beds, lot of cots, what you can call and we all slept like one along side the other and then there's a partition, then there's another large room. There's a lot of people sleeping in one room. The meals were brought to you very sparingly. SIGRIST: What kinds of food? BELFORD: The food? I remember the food was so bad that many times my mother would say, "Don't eat it," or, "Eat a little." She herself was very sick. She was confined to her bed actually the whole trip through and we three kids were standing there around her. We were allowed to go out on the deck and people from upstairs, first class and second class, would look down on us and they would feel sorry for us and many times they would throw down an orange or apples or some food. And we, the children, would all stand by and we'd stand, I remember, stand there and this one would catch this and this one would catch that and you were lucky enough to get something. And, of course, being that my mother was sick, if it was an orange or so we'd bring it into her. SIGRIST: Had you ever seen an orange? BELFORD: No, we didn't. But I remember somebody else showed my mother, no, oranges they saw, yes. My mother never saw a banana, that I know. None of us ever saw a banana. And the trip was very, very hard. The food was very bad and the accommodations, of course, we couldn't take a bath or anything like that and it was very, very poor. And on Friday nights I remember because, you know, we Jewish women light candles and the first Friday night we were aboard ship there were Jewish women who would put their candles, everybody with a pair of candlesticks, you know, would light the candles and that infuriated the, naturally it was a dangerous thing to do, that infuriated the sailors and all and they'd walk around blowing out the candles and they'd yell, "Dumpke Juden!," stupid Jews, which really was a terrible thing to do. But it was terrible, the whole voyage across. SIGRIST: What was it like being a little girl on a huge boat? You've ever seen anything like this. BELFORD: Never seen a boat. SIGRIST: What were you feeling at that time? BELFORD: Just amazed, amazed and you can't believe what you're seeing and you didn't change your clothing every day aboard ship, you know. And once in a while, once it happened during the ship that a few people came down from upstairs and spoke to us children and gave us some candy. The first time we really saw any kind of a candy or sweets and how we were so happy to get it. And, uh, and the whole trip across was something terrible. SIGRIST: Were there lots of people traveling steerage? BELFORD: An awful lot. Steerage was closed, was together. People were sleeping actually together. SIGRIST: Were there lots of other kids? BELFORD: The odor was awful. There were a lot of children, a lot of grown ups, a lot of men, a lot of women. People didn't even talk to each other they were so miserable and we always huddled together and it was very, very hard, very bad. SIGRIST: How long did the trip last. BELFORD: It must have been about two weeks. And, uh, as I said before, my mother was in bed the whole time. We tried to get around, we tried to go outside and see what we can get and she'd send us out for some air, that you need a little bit of air or whatever it was. And then all of a sudden we heard a big commotion and we came to America and everybody started yelling they see the Lady, the Statue of Liberty, and we all ran upstairs and my mother got out bed. We went upstairs and everybody started screaming and crying. You were kissing each other. People that you didn't even know before that were along side of you and you never paid any attention. Everybody was so excited that you see America and you see the Lady with her hand up, you know. And then the ship came into port and there was a doctor there that examined you. Examined mostly your hair, your head, your eyes. I remember distinctly the hair and the eyes and I guess, you know, we all passed. There were people who did not pass that they put aside that had to go back. (end of cassette tape side one) SIGRIST: This is all at Ellis Island? BELFORD: All at Ellis Island. It was a very big room. You were always with a lot of people. By that time you were used to having people with you. You were always with a whole lot of people and everybody was pushing and, you know, shoving and we were on this, as I said before, one doctor examined your hair, one doctor examined your eyes and then you kept going along. My mother held us to her hands and then, when we got to the end, they sent us to another large room and they had a meal for us. Well, that room I remember distinctly because it was immense. To me it looked like it was everything; the whole world was there. And they had long tables and they gave us some kind of meat and we looked at my mother whether we can eat it because it might not be kosher. And my mother just smiled and said, "Eat it," because we didn't have a good piece of meat all the way through. And we were just starting, we ate some of it, some of the food, and everybody was busy running around and they were, and as we were eating they were calling people out that had to go to be called; the people had to, people came to pick somebody up, you know what I mean, they called for them. And finally they called our name. We were there only a short time. In fact, we were in the middle of eating and when they called our name we looked at my mother. Should we go or should we eat? Well, anyhow, we went and, in fact, my brother took a napkin and put the meat into it. You can't leave it when you get meat so there was a napkin there; he took and put the meat in there. My mother hollered at him but he took it anyhow. And they called us to this table there and a couple of men and they asked us our name. And then we looked across and there was a big gate there and a lot of people. And they took our name and all and they asked my father, and my brother was there and an uncle of mine, and they said, "All right," and we got off and I didn't want to go to my father. I didn't know him. He picked me up. I started to cry. I didn't want to go. I started kicking and crying and so on and so forth and he put me down again and, of course, the crying and all that. And finally we got out of that building and looking around I remember my mother saying, "So this is America. It's wonderful." These big buildings she never saw, you know, anything so big and we stood there awhile and then we went up on the elevator. We lived, my father got an apartment for us on Norfolk Street, three rooms on the fourth floor. Anyhow, we got on the elevator and then, when we had to get off and everything was so, so marvelous, so different that you were in a, well, you were in a different world. And we got off and walked over to the apartment and went upstairs and my mother said, "Four flights you walk up," you know. And my father had it furnished. He had a bedroom, the kitchen and the dining room and in the bedroom he had a large mirror and my mother looked at it and she said the same thing as she saw in Europe, you know, in that, and she marveled at it. You can see your whole body. You could see what your wearing. It's something that you didn't hear of and the first time we saw a rocker and, oh my God, it was like a swing. We called it a swing. And I think I wrote in this part; when my mother sat by the window and she looked out and saw people having lines of clothing, you know, wash out and she looked down and she says to my father, "In America they have such big ladders that they climb up to hang the wash?" And, of course, people started laughing and that shut her up for a while. SIGRIST: Do you remember, I want to ask you a question about your mother and father. BELFORD: Yes. SIGRIST: Do you remember how they greeted each other when they saw each other? BELFORD: Yes, I do. I remember my father putting his arms around my mother and the two of them standing a while and crying and my father said to my mother, "You're in America now and you have nothing to be afraid of. Nothing at all." And he explained to her that you could go out in the street and you could mingle with people. That's the first thing he said to her and then we continued going. SIGRIST: Now your brothers and sister would have been that much older that they would have remembered your father. BELFORD: Oh yes, oh yes, see, but I didn't. SIGRIST: But you didn't. BELFORD: I didn't remember my father and it took me about a week before I really went to him. And then we were in the apartment and we had some company coming in, I think I told this story, too, about the religious Jewish people wear wigs when they get married and my mother wore a wig and, I remember this distinctly, this cousin of mine, she was the American, the Americanized one, you know, and she came in and the first thing she did, she went over to my mother and took off her wig. And my mother said, "Oh, my God! What are you doing to me?!," you know, and she said, "In America you're not going to wear a wig. You know, in America you can go just the way you want to go," and so on and so forth. And it took us quite a while to get used to America. SIGRIST: Talk a little bit about your mother, because it was all very new for her, adapting to America. BELFORD: My mother stayed in the house for about a week. She was afraid to go down because she was afraid to go out and she wouldn't know how to mingle with people. And, of course, she loved America. The idea that she could be free as you can be. And the first time she went down; so my father kept saying, "You got to go down! You got to get used to this. There's a butcher downstairs. They're Jewish. There are Jewish people all around you." And she went down after being here about a week or so to do some marketing and the butcher was very nice to her and she was so happy that they spoke to her. They spoke in her language and everybody was nice and friendly and whatever she was able to buy. And she went back and she goes up one stairway and she doesn't know how to get back to her apartment and she stood there and she was embarrassed to ask because people laughed at her whenever she asked a question, you know. So she stood there. Finally she called my sister's name. My sister's name in Jewish was "Sepa" and she stands there yelling "Sepa!" My sister was told in America you don't open the doors unless you know who is there and she didn't hear her anyhow. Well, anyhow, one of the women saw my mother or heard her so she told her, "You're up on the third floor or the fourth floor. You got to count your floors," and told her how to get upstairs. And after that she used to go down and do her shopping every morning, got acquainted, as I said before, with the butcher and the grocer and was very glad. And we children, my mother learned how to do the washing here, the laundry, because in Europe, I'll go back to Europe now, in Europe they didn't do their washing at home. The living hut she had she didn't do washing there. They go to the river and they did their washing there. So here in America she learned how you do your washing and so on and so forth. And she enjoyed her life here. She got used to the neighbors. Everybody, everybody was very, very nice. SIGRIST: It was predominantly a Jewish neighborhood. BELFORD: Jewish neighborhood so she wasn't afraid of going out and talking to somebody and they should be harsh with her. She, uh, they spoke her language and she felt good. And then she started going down during the day, like more than once, you know. She took that chance. And then she heard that in America your children can go to school. Well, that was something that she never believed would ever happen. A neighbor told her, "You can send your children to school. Why are they home? You're here about a month or so, " and we still didn't go. So somebody took my sister. My brothers were too old, seventeen or, you know what I mean, or sixteen. So my sister was the first one that went. My sister at that time was about nine years old and she came home and she told us, I remember, that they told her that the little sister can go, also. That I can go but my mother said, "No. You go for about a couple of weeks or so and see what it is and then you'll come back." Because to my mother it was like a miracle that her children could really go to school here. Well, my sister went for about a month and she told her teacher that she's got a little sister home. "Well, bring her in, by all means." So my mother dressed me up fancy. Our clothing was given to us when we came to America by cousins of ours. And she dressed me up and I remember this. I remember distinctly. They sent me to kindergarten and the teacher asked me my name. I couldn't talk English then. We spoke Jewish in the house. So my sister said to me, you know in Jewish, "Tell her your name." I said, "Esther." I said my name is Esther. I called myself "Estelle" later on. So she said, "Esther what?" I couldn't, I didn't know what she meant but she kept saying, "But what do they call you?" "They call me Esther." Well, the teacher had the hardest time and my sister couldn't get the drift of it either. At that time I guess she didn't know too much English, also. Anyhow, my teacher's name was Mrs. Levine. I'll never forget that. She was the most nicest person and I remember that she put her arms around me and made me feel at ease and when I came home and I told my mother how nice the teacher was, my mother was petrified at home. God knows what's going to happen to me there. And when I came home she was so happy and so glad. My mother kept saying, "It's the most wonderful thing in America that your child can go to school with Gentile children, come home, her hair isn't torn, her dress isn't torn, she isn't beaten up, she comes home, walks with these children in the street." I'll never forget this was more to her than anything else. Walks in the street with these Gentile children, goes upstairs, has her lunch, goes down, goes back to school and everything is wonderful. To her that was a miracle that nobody hit us. Nobody did anything to us and that was our life on Norfolk Street. SIGRIST: How did you learn English? BELFORD: In school from the A-B-C's and I'll tell you something. I think the way they taught us was the best way. They taught us the A-B-C, they taught us how to count the tables from one to twelve. My mother never had any schooling. Her biggest pleasure in life after we got into the higher grades, I'm going from one thing to another, from the second or third grade was the biggest pleasure that on Sabbath, on Saturday, she didn't do any work in the house, we would sit down, open up our history book and read as much as we can read and explain it to her and open up our geography book and show her the pictures. That was the best, better than going to a show or anything else. To think that her child is so knowledgeable, that she knows that and that we can tell it to her. That, to her; my father always worked hard. SIGRIST: Is this how your mother picked up English? BELFORD: My mother never spoke English. SIGRIST: She never spoke any. BELFORD: My mother started speaking English and, as I said before, she was very sensitive and she misspelled a word or misused a word and people started laughing so she didn't. Neither did my father. My father understood English. He was the one who was able to read the street numbers, not the names, you know. And, of course, by going to work and going from work and being with men. We children spoke Jewish in the house all the way through until I was married. We learned our English in school and amongst the children we played with and we, uh, but in the house was always Jewish. SIGRIST: Talk about your religious life at this point because surely you're much freer now. BELFORD: Yes, we're freer. SIGRIST: There must be a synagogue nearby. BELFORD: Right., right. There was a synagogue not far from, you know, on the East Side there are synagogues very often and there's one. It still is there on Rivington Street. Rivington near Essex. In fact, my father went there until he died. And it is, I think, it is one of the oldest synagogues in the state or in New York. I really think it is, or on the East Side. And my father would go there every Friday at sundown. He'd go there and my mother would go sometimes but my father would go every Friday and every Saturday morning. At Friday we knew that after you greet the Sabbath you light the candles, you do not do any more work in the house, wouldn't even do any cooking. So she had a pilot light and that was on all night long, naturally, so you kept things warm there and Saturday you didn't cook so you ate cold things, you know. She cooked certain things that you eat cold like certain beans, whatever, and you ate your chicken cold or so until sundown. A Sabbath was just a day of doing nothing. My father would go to temple, to the synagogue, and we lived on the East Side and everybody got dressed up. By this time you're able to buy yourself a little clothing; you were able to do something with us children. We had cousins that used to live in the Bronx. They'd come down visit us and they'd bring us clothing and, uh, life, of course, was much better and my mother was able to cook the meals she wanted to. SIGRIST: This is going to be my next question. Describe... BELFORD: She as able to cook differently because she was able to get the ingredients, where in Europe, as I said before, it was mostly the corn meal, corn meal mush, whatever you want to call it. It was potato. Where in America she had the carrots and she learned how to make different soups and different dishes and she knew she could go down to Delancey Street where they had the fish market. Am I talking too much? SIGRIST: No, no. Go ahead. BELFORD: And she'd buy the live fish there. That's after being here about six months that she learned all this and she'd make her gefilte fish on Friday. So Friday was always, 'til my mother died, Friday night was a big night home. Friday afternoon, even during the week you had to eat not so very well. You couldn't afford to eat the very good meals or whatever, you know. But Friday you had to have your Sabbath meal no matter what so she learned how to cook differently and we had our chicken. We had our gefilte fish, as they say. SIGRIST: Did you have running water in your apartment? BELFORD: Yes, we had running water. Cold water. No hot water. We had a coal stove. SIGRIST: How was the apartment lit? BELFORD: By, the apartment was lit by lamps for a short time and after that they put in gas and we had gaslight and I remember you had to buy these little mantles to put in and every once in a while one of them would go bad and you had to buy another to put in and in order to pay for the gas you had a meter in the house. And you used to put a quarter in the meter and that would allow you to use a certain amount of gas and when that went low you knew you had to put another quarter in. So my father always had a couple of quarters on the side so that should it get dark all of a sudden you know that you have to feed the the meter. That was the way of life then. The toilet... SIGRIST: How was the apartment heated? BELFORD: Heated? You just had the coal stove. You had a coal stove in the kitchen and in the morning when you got up and it was cold you'd take your clothing, you run into the kitchen and you got dressed by the kitchen. Your toilets were in the hall. Two tenants used one toilet and that was the way of life. My father was a hard working man and he used to take work home to work at night. He used to make the linings for the fur coats. So I remember distinctly also as a child, he'd have his supper. He was a hard working, plain, simple, wonderful man. And after supper just sit up a little while and then he'd go to bed. He'd get up about four o'clock in the morning and he had these linings all ready to work on. My sister and I, as young as we were, well, we slept in the kitchen and he used to work in the kitchen so the light went on so we got up. Many times we'd fall asleep again but most times we'd sit up with him and my father would tell us stories of Europe and we'd thread the needle for him and he would make these linings. SIGRIST: Was he sewing by hand or did he have a machine? BELFORD: By hand. No, no machine. By hand. He made all the linings and then in the morning he'd take it to work and the next day when he came home he brought some linings home to do during the night and that was the way of making a living, making more money. Their home life, well, I come out of a home that was, uh, a lot of togetherness there. SIGRIST: Did you warm up to your father after a while? You were so reticent at first. BELFORD: Yes, yes. Oh, it just took a short time, about a couple of weeks and then I went to my father and, of course, that made him very happy. And being I was the baby I always sat near him when he ate. And I got a pair of skates. I was about ten years old and my father saw the other children on skates and I remember him telling my mother that he thinks I ought to have. My sister was, well, the older one, so the baby got it. And I remember my first pair of skates with wooden wheels. I'll never forget. I remember that. Those things stay with you. They don't go away. And our life was a lot of togetherness and not too many elaborate parties. You were just together. SIGRIST: Could you describe in our few remaining minutes what the street was like? What was the neighborhood like? BELFORD: Norfolk Street? SIGRIST: Was it a noisy neighborhood? BELFORD: It was very noisy. The houses, the tenement houses were all about four stories high. The school was about two blocks away and it was very noisy, very crowded and everybody was, everybody knew each other and everybody was very friendly. SIGRIST: Did a lot of people hang out in the street? BELFORD: No. SIGRIST: No. BELFORD: No, no, no. You were in the house. We moved. We moved to Tenth Street, to Eleventh Street rather, and I went to school PS126. That was on Twelfth Street. Twelfth Street between A and B. That school went as far as the fifth grade. After the fifth grade they were just building a new school which was ready when my class was ready to be transferred. PS61. And I went to PS61 until I graduated. My brothers and sister did not graduate school because they had to go to work as soon as they were old enough. I went to work, also. SIGRIST: What did your sister do? What was her first job? BELFORD: She worked in a factory at hats. And I did, I worked in a factory. SIGRIST: Doing what? BELFORD: I, uh, we worked, we kept trimmings. I remember we kept schedule. If anybody needed something we handed this out, handed that out and later on, I got a little older, when I got out of school I worked as a saleslady. That was my thing and I worked as a saleslady down on Division Street quite a while. And in those days you worked until ten o'clock at night and I worked at that. Saleslady was my thing. SIGRIST: You like people. BELFORD: I do. I still do. I still do and I was, and we lived down there a long time and then we moved to Saint Mark's Place. I was sixteen years old. That's on Eighth Street near Avenue A and I was married from there and I moved to, I don't know if you're interested in that part. You're interested in Europe and my parents. SIGRIST: I do want to ask you a question about your parents again because we're short on time. BELFORD: Yes. SIGRIST: Tell me about, were your parents glad they came to America? BELFORD: Very, very happy. They never wanted to go back. They think, they always did think that this was, no matter what they went through in this land, they didn't always have a lot of money, they struggled, but everything was Paradise here. America was the best place in the world and, as I said before, never longed to go back, never had any desire to even go out, you know, out of New York, actually. And, uh... SIGRIST: Do you think your life would have been a lot different if you had stayed in Roumania? BELFORD: Oh, I wouldn't be alive. Oh, definitely not. Oh, definitely no because they were mistreated to such a big extent by their neighbors, you know. By their close neighbors that they were so mistreated that, oh no. I'd have no life. There would be no life there at all and, uh, we were all very, very glad. I'll say, uh, I had a son. I lost a son two years ago and my son always said that he worships his grandfather, my father. He always worshiped him. He always thought he was the most wonderful thing; to think that he had the foresight to come to America and that's how all of us felt. All us children, we always felt that way until today. If anybody says anything to me, I, I feel about America. No matter what hardships we go through here and you can complain about your president or about this one, it's still the best place in the world. I was brought up that way and I feel that way. And to think what we went through in Europe, starvation as I said before, with the meals and all that and the life here is so different that until they died both my parents, 'til the day they died America was the most wonderful place in the world. And they really, they were very, very happy they came and we children were very happy that they had the foresight to come here. And that was it. SIGRIST: Well, Mrs. Belford, I want to thank you very much... BELFORD: Thank you. SIGRIST: For giving us your time and letting us come out here. BELFORD: Thank you. Am I off the thing now? SIGRIST: No, no. We're still on. BELFORD: Oh. SIGRIST: And, (he laughs) I just want to say "thank you." BELFORD: No, I wanted to, thank you men, thank you. SIGRIST: This is Paul Sigrist signing off for the National Park Service. BELFORD: Well, I wanted...Is it off now?