LEVINE: Let me say this first. This is Janet Levine for the National Park Service. I'm here, it's August 1, 1993. I'm with Helen Gotterer Oratofsky in her home in the Bronx, New York. And Helen came from Hungary in 1921 when she was thirteen years old. I'm very happy to be here. I'm looking forward to your story. ORATOFSKY: I'm happy, too. It puts a little light in my dull life. LEVINE: Okay. Why don't we start at the beginning. Tell me your birth date and the town you were born in. ORATOFSKY: Gyogyos. You know how to spell it? LEVINE: No. ORATOFSKY: I'll spell it for you. Capital G-Y-O-G-Y-O-S. And the O's have two dots that makes a Gyogyos. Other would be Gyo, and it's Gyn. Not exactly O. That's Hungarian. You want me to write it down? LEVINE: Uh, no, that's okay. And your birth date? ORATOFSKY: May 14, 1907. LEVINE: Now, Gyogyos, or however you pronounce . . . ORATOFSKY: Gyogyos. LEVINE: Gyogyos, tell me about the town. What do you remember about it? ORATOFSKY: Oh, I remember as if I was there today. It's a small town. It's not poor. What should I say, middle class, sort of middle class people there, because some of them were millionaires. And it was very small. It was smaller than Co-op City, than this section, Co-op City. And a lot of people were richer. They had businesses. And the poor struggled. What else can I say? They had schools, a lot of, you know, schools. Everybody had to go to school. If not, they were fined. A man came, what do you call it, a truant officer, no? Came and take them, they put, they were ready to put my mother in jail, because Theresa, my sister, she didn't ever go to school. She had to help her. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Well, what was your mother's name? ORATOFSKY: Her, Johanna. LEVINE: Johanna. Do you remember her maiden name, by any chance? ORATOFSKY: Yeah. It should be, Johanna, you know. Gotterer was my name, Gotterer. LEVINE: That was your father's name. ORATOFSKY: No, that was my father's name. Schimmel, Johanna Schimmel. S-C-H-I-M-M-E-L. Ooh, I remember. LEVINE: Tell about your father, his name. ORATOFSKY: His name was Max. LEVINE: And your sister? ORATOFSKY: Miksha. In Hungarian it's Miksha. LEVINE: M-I-C-H . . . ORATOFSKY: Mik, no, Mik. M-I-K-S-H-A. Miksha. LEVINE: And how about your sisters, their names? ORATOFSKY: The oldest one was here in America already. She came seven years before we did. Her name was Rose, but in Hungarian you want to know it? LEVINE: If you want to. ORATOFSKY: Rosz, Rosz, in Hungarian. R-O-S-Z. But, Rose. LEVINE: And then the next sister? ORATOFSKY: The next was Cirian. That's sort of Cirina, Cirian. But they changed in America to Sylvia. They gave us different names. LEVINE: And the next one? ORATOFSKY: And Therese, Terias. T-E-R, you know, Prince Theresa, Princess Theresa? That's interpreted Theresa. And mine is Helen. My mother had three younger children. They died. LEVINE: Do you remember them when they died? ORATOFSKY: No, I was the last one. But I was so, three girls. We were seven girls. My mother didn't like my father because he only made girls. It was his fault. My mother blamed everything on my father. ( break in tape ) She was mean. LEVINE: What did your father do for work? ORATOFSKY: In Europe? Nothing. He was a religious man, and he went to schul every day. We were very poor, my mother. And my father came to America with my older sister. They had a lot of relatives here, rich and educated. One was a principal of a high school, of a school. LEVINE: These were your father's relatives? ORATOFSKY: Yes, for my father's. They were rich, and they were the ones who took us out, gave us money. We didn't have money. We were very poor. LEVINE: I see. So when, so you were about seven years old? ORATOFSKY: So my mother, no. My father and Rose, the oldest, came seven years before, to (?), before I came. LEVINE: I see. So do you remember your father from Hungary? Do you remember him when you were little? ORATOFSKY: I remember he was a short, chubby man with a red beard. He had a red beard. I remember as it happened today. My mother was, my father was nice, good-natured. My mother was very mean. LEVINE: Do you remember any things that you did with your father? ORATOFSKY: Yeah. He went to schul every day. That was his life. He was very religious. He never made a living. You know when he made a living? We made wine in Gyogyos. They were famous for wine. You know how they made the wine? In a big vat, a wooden vat. Put the grapes in, and put white socks on, and do it. They had no machines in those years. And he was, and pesce, he helped make the matzos, and summertime he help make wine, to step, step the wine, you know. They had no machine to grind it. So they took a few men, and they put on white socks, and they did it, and they got wine like that. I mean, not big, but that's how my father made a living. And he was very religious. LEVINE: So was the whole family religious? Like, did you have to do, learn . . . ORATOFSKY: Well, they tried it, but we girls, as soon as we came to America they threw it back to Europe. Non of us observed it. LEVINE: When you were there, what did you do, by way of observing? Did you go to temple? ORATOFSKY: I went to school. I had to go to school. I was, I went to day school, and we had a Hebrew teacher. Once a week they taught us Hebrew, the Jewish. It was a lot of, (?) the Jews in a little city. The whole city was smaller than (?). LEVINE: Were there Gentiles in the city too? ORATOFSKY: They were, most of them were very anti-Semitic. And then the Roumanians came in, soldiers. I don't know why they picked this little city. And the mothers all had to hide their daughters in the cellar, because they would rape them. LEVINE: Do you remember anything about the first World War when you were there? ORATOFSKY: You know what I remember? There was a very religious man. No, a very rich man. His daughter was Julia, went to school with me. And because the Roumanian soldiers, you know what it means in wartime to take over a city and the enemy comes in? They killed half of the Jews. And coming home from school, the main street was a circle, and they were hanging the man whose daughter went to school with me, and I saw it, and I started to cry, and the woman next to me said, in Hungarian, "Don't cry. They're going to punish you if they see that you feel sorry. These are soldiers. They are killers." And they hung him up because he had money, he was a Jew. And nobody stopped it. They had soldiers. They didn't, they were very anti-Semitic. I remember that so clearly. LEVINE: What else do you remember about school?We had a nice school. We had a woman teacher. Her name was Gisella. She was so strict, if you didn't do your lessons, you had to hold out your hand like this and she hit it with a bamboo stick. That's how they punished the children there. Not like in America, you're not allowed to punish a child. We had to hold our hand and they hit us, the teachers, but they taught us good. We came to America, we were, we had a good education. And you know what? We learned the English language, except my father never learned it. My mother, two weeks later she was sitting on the street reading the paper, the Hungarian English paper. ( she laughs ) LEVINE: Wow. ORATOFSKY: She was a fox, but she was mean. She was mean to her own children. LEVINE: Do you remember your house? Do you remember what, the house you lived in? ORATOFSKY: Yeah. We were poor, we were poor, because my father never worked. Summertime it wasn't bad. Heat, we didn't have. We had one room where we had two beds and four of us slept here. We were three girls and my mother. So two beds, I slept with my sister Theresa, and my mother slept with one of the other sisters. We were four of us. My mother was in, my father was in America already. Before that I don't remember. LEVINE: Do you remember . . . ORATOFSKY: And the kitchen was with earth, not with wooden, and full of mice in the room. Ah, they were full of mice. ( she laughs ) We were poor. We were very poor. My mother made a living, you know how she made a living? She raised goose, geese, and sold it to the Jews, (?). And she made a living doing that thing. They knew, everybody knew us that we were nice religious people. We had a good name. My mother, too. My mother was good to people, but she wasn't good to her children. Only to me, because I looked like her, so she liked me. LEVINE: Oh. ORATOFSKY: I was the youngest. But she didn't like my sisters. She used to hit them. Once she . . . LEVINE: Did you have . . . ORATOFSKY: What? LEVINE: Did you have to do chores around the house? ORATOFSKY: Of course we had to do chores. But I didn't do anything, because when Theresa says, "Helen, I'll wash the dishes, you wipe," my mother beat her up. She says, "She's weak. She can't wipe the dishes," meaning me. She liked me, because I looked like her. That was Europe. ( she laughs ) You never heard of such a thing, did you? LEVINE: Yeah. Where did your mother raise the geese? Right in the back yard, or . . . ORATOFSKY: Where did she what? LEVINE: Raise the geese? ORATOFSKY: We had a comra. You know what a comra is? What do you call it, where you keep the wood and everything, and junks, and, a wooden, little house with a door with a lock on it. That's where we kept them, and that's where my mother raised the geese. And they got stabbed, and then she had a schochet. What's a schochet? One who cuts the, religious, you know, who . . . LEVINE: Oh. Breaks the neck? ORATOFSKY: How do you call that? LEVINE: Uh . . . ORATOFSKY: In the Jewish religion. You should know something about the Jewish. Are you Jewish? LEVINE: ( she laughs ) I'm . . . ORATOFSKY: ( addressing someone else ) Is she Jewish? LEVINE: I'm about a third Jewish. ( she laughs ) ORATOFSKY: A third? How can you divide yourself in three? Who cut you up? ( they laugh ) LEVINE: Well, so . . . ORATOFSKY: And my mother raised the geese there. All you needed was corn and, you know, she put a little fat on it, and that made them fat. I remember that so vividly. LEVINE: And do you remember, like, did people come there to buy them, or did she take the geese someplace? ORATOFSKY: She took it, they were rich people. Only to the rich. There were a lot of rich people in my city. LEVINE: What did they do, the rich people? ORATOFSKY: I don't know. Their husbands were businessmen. They went out to Budapest and bought things and sold them. They were business, too. One had an ice cream parlor, but we never had money to eat there. My mother wouldn't give us money to eat. My mother was foxy. She was mean, though, very mean. LEVINE: How was she foxy? What did she do that was . . . ORATOFSKY: She made the children do things that they didn't want to do. Like Sylvia learned how to be a dressmaker. You have to pay a dressmaker. So she said, "Well, you have to wash the floors." And she never did any work. She made the children do the housework. And she wanted them to . . . LEVINE: Yeah, go ahead. ORATOFSKY: She wanted them to do everything, clean the house. We had a trunk in the kitchen. The kitchen was about half of this room, with a (?), wooden, not wooden, and there was a trunk there, I remember, and she kept all the junk there. And once I opened the trunk and a mouse fell there. ( she laughs ) I screamed, so my mother said, "What are you afraid of? The mouse is smaller than you." She wasn't afraid of anything. She was a real bad (?). She didn't want to come. She came to America. When we were here about two weeks, she said she don't like America. The air isn't good. She'll take me and go back to Europe. I said, "Mother, I'm not going with you. I'm staying with my sisters right here." She wanted to go back. LEVINE: Well, let's, first, is there anything else about your house, like what did your mother cook on? And . . . ORATOFSKY: We had a coal stove. We didn't have, we had no electric heat or candles for, you know what a petroleum lamp is? LEVINE: Kerosene lamp? ORATOFSKY: Kerosene lamp. LEVINE: Yeah. And did you have, uh, running water? ORATOFSKY: No, we went to the well. Where we had there were one, two, three tenants, and it was, the yard was bigger than this area. There were three tenants. One was a couple, no children. One was a businessman. He had a store right there that had three children, and he had an affair with his, her husband's brother. He went to go out of town to buy stuff, and he crept in through the window, and we saw. And he made a child. She gave birth to a little girl. And her husband liked her, he forgave her. And we were there, we were very poor. They were well-off. We were the only poor ones. We were very poor. LEVINE: Well, this is a house, and it had three families? ORATOFSKY: Three families, a big yard, and there was a well in one corner where you let the (?), but that wasn't drinking water. It wasn't good. Artesian well. You know what an Artesian? We had to walk as far as maybe over here where what do you call, where Pathmark is. LEVINE: Like the shopping center there? ORATOFSKY: Huh? LEVINE: You mean, as far as the shopping center is from here? ORATOFSKY: Yes. LEVINE: Uh-huh. ORATOFSKY: The well, artesian well, they called it. That was good water. So we had to carry in a pail our water, water to drink. For washing and dishes this water was good. But we went to the artesian well and schlepped a big, heavy, enamel pots, big ones, and we put it on a board and covered it up and we dragged that until we left. That's how we lived. LEVINE: Did you have to go get the water? ORATOFSKY: No. Me, they didn't. I was the youngest. My mother had to. She made the others do it, and she cursed them. She didn't like us. She didn't like her children. I don't know why. LEVINE: Did you have other relatives around, like grandparents, and aunts and uncles? ORATOFSKY: In Europe? From far away. You know where? In Czechoslovakia. My mother came from Czechoslovakia, and my father. They were married over there. LEVINE: Oh. ORATOFSKY: They had a nice family, a beautiful family. They came summertime to visit us. LEVINE: Oh. ORATOFSKY: They were very religious, and they came to visit us. LEVINE: Do you know why your mother and father moved from Czechoslovakia to Hungary? ORATOFSKY: I don't know. I never found out, because my father, this, my father's family lived there, and my father was supposed to marry one of my mother's sisters, and my mother said, "You can't marry her. She's younger. I'm the oldest. I marry." So my father had to marry her. They were well-off. They were business people. Anybody who was in business, they had it pretty good. LEVINE: Uh-huh. So, what did people do in the town? Did they, they had grapes, right? That was one kind of . . . ORATOFSKY: Yeah, and fruit. We had fruit orchards, miles. And you know what? In back over our house we had a crazy house, a hospital? I remember that. LEVINE: What do you remember about it? ORATOFSKY: Oh, well, you're real stupid people. In summertime they let them out on the yard, and it was a wire gate, and we used to stand and say hello in Hungarian, not in English. It was a crazy house right near our house. LEVINE: Do you remember any of the patients? ORATOFSKY: No, I don't know them. My sister had a girlfriend, and she walked with her on the street, and all of a sudden she was, they were very good friends. My sister was a violent. No, that was the oldest, when they were in Europe yet, she looked at Rosa, my sister, and slapped her. She said, "Why do you hit me?" "Because I feel like it." She was crazy. They put her in the crazy house. But otherwise my sisters learned how to sew. They were a dressmaker. My mother paid her a couple of, how do you call money in Hungarian? I forgot already. I forgot. LEVINE: I can't think either. ORATOFSKY: Money. And they taught her how to sew. My sisters, all of them, Theresa, too, a little bit, not as much, but the two oldest were good dressmakers, very good dressmakers. They pursued that here, and they were hired. LEVINE: When they were still in Hungary, did they make money from being dressmakers? ORATOFSKY: Well, not much, because it was a small city, very small. LEVINE: Do you remember your clothes, what you dressed like when you lived in Hungary? ORATOFSKY: Well, I was a child. Then schmuttas. You know what's schmuttas? We weren't well off. We weren't rich. We had what to eat my mother, you know, she bought. There was, a war was around, surrounding places, and many times little wars broke out. So, and my mother once went to, I forgot the name of the city, and she rolled up tobacco leaves, and she sold it, and she put it here. And we were in the train, I was with her, the soldier said something, and that was illegal to transport tobacco. And the soldier was walking back and forth, and my mother was near the window, and I was sitting next to her. And he says, "I smell tobacco. I smell something. You got . . ." She said, "No, I'm pregnant." She made herself pregnant, and they let her go. You know what? If they would have wanted to, they'd put her against the wall. Without trial, without anything I showed her. LEVINE: Did that happen much? Did you see that? ORATOFSKY: It happened. They hung a man for no reason because he was rich. I saw him. I saw him. But there were a lot of rich people. I don't know how they got rich there, Gentiles. Jews, some Jews, too. LEVINE: Did Jews mostly live in one section, do you remember? ORATOFSKY: Well, I don't remember my mother moving. There was a tremendous market there. That I remember. First we lived in a hotel that they turned into apartments. And we moved, we only had one room and a kitchen. We slept in the kitchen, in the back room. The bedroom was our room. LEVINE: So did you . . . ORATOFSKY: But I had to go to school all the time, and school was very strong. And there was a big market on Friday. LEVINE: What was the market, yeah. Tell me what it was like on market day. ORATOFSKY: The peasants brought the horses with wagons, and they sold everything. And my girlfriend, I had a Gentile girlfriend, they had a saloon next house, and we were the same age, and I was friendly with her. She was Gentile. My mother tolerated, because she liked me. So I used to watch the men playing cards, and I learned how to play cards. ( she laughs ) LEVINE: This was your friend's, your friend's parents owned a saloon? Your girlfriend. ORATOFSKY: She lived next block from me, the next block. They were rich. They were Gentile. Very, they were peasants. They worked themselves up. And they sold everything, and they had a saloon. It came from Hungary with the drinking, the Gentiles always drank. The Jews didn't drink. It was like a, like here, what do you call a saloon? A saloon. LEVINE: Yeah. Were they drinking wine? ORATOFSKY: Whiskey. What kind of wine? They brought stuff to sell, horses and animals and vegetables for the people, and we bought them. Because there were some stores in the (?) city. A very small city I lived in. LEVINE: Is that where your mother would sell the geese? In the market? ORATOFSKY: Yeah, yeah. No, she didn't go to the market. Nobody would touch. They wouldn't let her. These people were all peasants from out of town. They came with wagons and horses. There was no automobiles in my city. Later on then we were already ready to come here. The men, one of them saw an automobile, and, "Ooh, an automobile!" ( she laughs ) And, you know, we had toilet out in the yard, and it stunk. They cleaned it out once a year. That's how, that's how they lived. Primitive, very primitive. LEVINE: Do you remember any games you played or any things you did for fun? ORATOFSKY: What? LEVINE: Any toys you had? ORATOFSKY: Me? LEVINE: Yeah. ORATOFSKY: For fun? I was a little girl. When I came here I was young. What fun did we have? My girlfriends. I don't remember. We were playing. We jumped rope. They had rope jumping. But I had a Gentile girlfriend. My mother was good to her. She didn't like the Gentiles. The Gentiles, they don't like the Jews. Why was there, even in those years (?). LEVINE: Well, let's see. How about food? ORATOFSKY: Coming from an atmosphere to a country like America, can you picture that, and how we fitted in, and my sisters? Right away, my sisters, we were here two weeks, Sylvia and Rose went to look for a job. They hardly knew English, but they picked it up very fast. And they saw a policeman on the corner, so they went over to the policeman and said, "What time on the clock? What time is the clock?" They were learning English. And my sister learned something else. The turnstiles came out then, you know, the subway. It was no, and my sister, Sylvia, was a brain. You know what a brain is? She was fired. So when we went visiting the relatives, we had a lot of relatives here, American relatives. They came in the 1891 and 1893. They came to America. I don't know why. And when we went to visit an Aunt, so Sylvia said, turnstile, you put in a nickel at that time. Sylvia said I should go first. I said, "I don't want to go first. I'm afraid. You go first. You got the nickels. Give me a nickel, I'll go. "No," she said, "you go first." And she learned it right that day. She put the nickel in and snuck in behind me. ( she laughs ) You never saw now how good you, my sister Sylvia was a terrific person. She snuck it. I says, "You know, you're going to do that. I'm not going to go with you. They put you in jail here." She snuck in, but she got a job right away. We lived on the East Side. LEVINE: Wait. Before you tell me more about this country, do you remember police in . . . ORATOFSKY: What? LEVINE: Do you remember any encounters with police when you were still in Hungary? ORATOFSKY: No. There were police, so my sister would get by. We learned English in no time, you know that. LEVINE: No, but I mean when you were still in Hungary. ORATOFSKY: Oh, in Hungary? We never had anything to do with the police. LEVINE: How about food? Do you remember any food that your mother made or that you, that was common that you ate when you were still in Hungary, kinds of dishes that you had? ORATOFSKY: What kind, what? LEVINE: What kinds of food did you have? ORATOFSKY: We had good, we had food. My mother made, my mother was raising geese. We always had them to eat, and they were delicious. They were big geese. You know, when you feed them, they get big and fat. IF she didn't sell part of it, so we had one to eat. We didn't, we never went hungry. And my mother was a good cook, and she knew how to bake. I don't know where she learned it. LEVINE: Well, how was it decided that you would come to America? How did that happen? ORATOFSKY: I tell you, my sister and my father, a rich family wrote to my father and said, "We'll send you money. Come to America." And my father went with my sister, Rose. And there was always war brewing in Hungary, always wars. Hungary, on the map, was very large. So my sister and Rose came here seven years before we did. LEVINE: And did they write to you? ORATOFSKY: Oh, they sent us money and everything, sure. LEVINE: What . . . ORATOFSKY: My father got a job right away pressing pants in a factory. I don't know how he learned it. He was a yeshiva bucha. You know what a Yeshiva? He made a, he was studying, he was praying, and the Jews, the religious Jews were, how should I say, they were charitable, and we used to have every, once a week, one of the students, the Hasidim, the religious, and we gave them food for nothing. They (?) by us. They were poor. We were, everybody was poor, very poor. There was no jobs for, only business. If you had money, you go in business. So who had money. LEVINE: Do you remember what Rose or your father wrote, and what they told you about what they experienced? ORATOFSKY: They arrived here. They came to an aunt. My aunt, what was their name? Look, I forgot their name. They lived on Riverside Drive. You know what it was in 1921 to live on Riverside Drive? They were rich. I don't know how they got rich. And their children all went to school. They became, later on they ignored us. They didn't bother with us, when we came to America. They didn't bother with us much, especially after my father died. LEVINE: What did, what did you expect, when you were first leaving Hungary and coming here, what did you know about America? What did you think? ORATOFSKY: We didn't be instructed better. First of all, my sister sent us money, my father and my sister. My father got a job right away, and so did my sister. So they had money, so they sent us money, seven years later, though. So we came second class. You know what it means to get second class? You know why? Because we found out, my mother was very shrewd. You know, if you were not clean they, and we all had lice. My mother never bathed me. Would you believe it? We had a little brook there, so Sylvia used to bathe me. My mother never had lice. I came to America, the teacher sent me home for two weeks. She said, "You have to clean your lice up." END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO ORATOFSKY: And a girl was teaching me how to talk English. I came in May, May 14, 19 . . . May, no, January. LEVINE: No, that's your birthday. You came in the winter, you said. ORATOFSKY: When? LEVINE: In the winter. ORATOFSKY: January. And I was taken to school right away. And this girl was, at that time a lot of immigrants came. The country was full of immigrants, the United States. So I, then my father registered me, too. No, my uncle came, a tall uncle. His name was Carlo, too, my father's brother. "Come, I'll take you." I couldn't speak English yet. I don't know what language, he didn't speak Jewish. "I'll take you to school." I was here two weeks. So he took me to the P.S. 71 downtown. Did you ever hear of it? Avenue A, Avenue B, there was a library there. So the teacher said these, there were a lot of immigrants. All right, you teach Helen how to talk English and read and everything. I was entered, I don't remember, we came in January, I think, in May. No, then came vacation. She was teaching me English, but I didn't know what the hell she was talking about. I couldn't learn from a Jewish girl. Then we had two months vacation. That's when I learned English. And I came back to the same school. Maybe I skipped, it skipped me, I don't remember. I spoke English, and this same girl, I was teaching her, not talking, arithmetic. The teacher said, "You're teaching her." I says, "Well, I know better. I went to school in Europe." I did. I was good in school. You had to go. LEVINE: So how did you learn it so well on vacation? ORATOFSKY: I learned it very fast. LEVINE: By playing with the kids? Is that how you . . . ORATOFSKY: Huh? LEVINE: Did you learn it by playing with other . . . ORATOFSKY: Oh, sure. I had friends right away. We learned from the teachers, even the Hebrew teachers. There you had to go to Hebrew, too. It was legal, they have to have a Jewish teacher one day a week every week, one day we had to go to, he came to school, and in a class, to teach us Jewish. LEVINE: This is in Hungary or here? ORATOFSKY: In Hungary. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Okay. So, tell me, do you remember leaving your town? Do you remember leaving to come to America? ORATOFSKY: Sure, I remember. LEVINE: What did you . . . ORATOFSKY: We didn't take nothing. We had a few schmuttas. You know what schmuttas is? Furniture, we didn't have. What did we have? We were very poor. LEVINE: Did your mother take anything that you can remember? ORATOFSKY: No. We had nothing. Junk. LEVINE: So did you . . . ORATOFSKY: And we packed up clothes, and they told us, you know, that if you have lice, they send you back, because people were dirty. So, but we came, my sister knew it, the one (?). My father never learned English. He never even knew English, a word. But Rose learned right away, and she found out that if you're not clean they don't let you in. They examine everybody. They take the hair apart. But we came second class. "You second class? Go ahead through." If you came second class. LEVINE: What did you leave the town in? Did you go in a horse and wagon from your town to get to the boat? ORATOFSKY: No, we had a train. We had a nice train right in our, small. It was about five, we had to walk it. I don't remember. Maybe like a concourse. We walked it. By train, we came by train. LEVINE: And then where did you go to catch the boat? Where did the boat go from? ORATOFSKY: Oh, we, Amsterdam. Then we took the, we had a passport to come to America, so they told us how to, they put us on the trains. And then we came to Amsterdam, I think. The boat was waiting, and we were second class. LEVINE: Did you get examined in Amsterdam, do you remember? ORATOFSKY: I don't remember. I don't know. LEVINE: Do you remember the name of the ship? ORATOFSKY: I don't think so. LEVINE: Do you remember the name of the ship? ORATOFSKY: Yeah, but I can't think of it now. My sister would remember. I can't think of it. LEVINE: So what was the ship like? What was the voyage like? ORATOFSKY: Oh, we were second class. It was beautiful. We had up and down, you know. I slept on top, my mother slept on the bottom. And they had good food. We never had such food. We never saw such food. But we were there, they had a storm monger there, and the boat stopped for three days and we were petrified that we would never get to America. But we did, we got here. A storm, they had to stop. But second class was, oh, everybody looked up to us. Second class! LEVINE: That was because . . . ORATOFSKY: But we were filthy dirty. LEVINE: But your, it was because your father and your sister sent you . . . ORATOFSKY: Money. LEVINE: Enough money for second class. ORATOFSKY: Yeah, yeah, yeah. LEVINE: Uh-huh. ORATOFSKY: They sent money, yeah. LEVINE: So, was there anything else about the voyage that you remember? ORATOFSKY: I was sick all the time. I was in the cabin day and night with my mother. And my sister Theresa and Sylvia were gallivanting around and fooling around with boys. But they were friendly, everybody was. I was sick. You know, the boat was going up and down, and there was a storm. We were scared that we were going to drown. I was in the cabin all the time. My mother, too. My mother wanted to go back to Europe. LEVINE: Do you remember coming into the New York Harbor? ORATOFSKY: Yes. I remember the little window where we had to go through, and my uncle and his wife was waiting. And they waved to us. I never saw them before, but they waited for us. They let us go right away. They saw American people, they told them where they lived, and they sent us money. We were privileged, second class, to come to America. What a pleasure. LEVINE: So, in other words . . . ORATOFSKY: But my sister cleaned me up. My sister Rose, she was here seven years. They, you know, they sent me home from school. She says, "You can't come to school with lice." So I told Rose. I says, "They sent me home." So she took kerosene, and every day she bathed me with kerosene, and two weeks later I was clean. ( she laughs ) LEVINE: So you didn't' have to go to Ellis Island? ORATOFSKY: No. We never went. Second class don't go to Ellis Island. LEVINE: Okay. So you . . . ORATOFSKY: But my name was, our name was written there somewhere. Somewhere, they took all the names of the immigrants. Ooh, the boats were filled, filled, filled with immigrants from all over. LEVINE: Do you remember . . . ORATOFSKY: They all had relatives here. I don't know how did my family come here. I don't know why. They were rich people. LEVINE: Well, do you remember the people in steerage? You were in second class. Do you remember the people who were coming steerage, in the bottom of the boat, all together in one big space? ORATOFSKY: My sister sneaked out. My sister Sylvia was a (?). She was, I don't know what she, she sneaked into the third class. They were so poor, they were sleeping on the floor, very poor. I says, "What are you going over there for? Over here we live like Queens." She says, "I don't know." She went to look. She was a daring one. But we came like millionaires, with lice in our heads. ( she laughs ) LEVINE: Well, so you went, then your aunt and your uncle picked you up, and how did you go, and where did you go to, when you got off the ship? ORATOFSKY: I think they had an apartment for us. This, I don't remember. But I'm almost sure. We lived on East 8th Street. And the landlord, it was a three-family house, a private house, and he bought it. He was a German, a German Jew. And we took the top apartment. They gave it to us. I don't know, my mother must have had the money that my sister must have paid for rent. We paid rent. And we . . . ( she coughs ) My sisters got jobs right away. LEVINE: All right. How was the apartment different from where you lived before? ORATOFSKY: My God, we had a kitchen with tile on the floor. And the bathroom. We had a bathroom. Ah! We had a bathroom. And my sister said, Rose, she was American. She had her nose up in the air. She says, "Over here, you have to be clean. You have to take a bath every day." ( she coughs ) LEVINE: Do you want a drink? ORATOFSKY: We had a three-family house. I forgot their name. LEVINE: And what was the Lower East Side like when you came, when you first moved in? ORATOFSKY: The what? LEVINE: The Lower East Side, where you were living? ORATOFSKY: It was nice, it was beautiful. Avenue B, you know what Avenue B is? It was all dress stores, and there was a Woolworth on one side. And my sister Sylvia got a job there by the dressmakers, to help out, right away. And my sister Rose lived with an aunt of ours. She didn't have an apartment, with my father. My aunt took her in. But then when we came thye looked for rooms and we moved on the East Side, on East 8th Street, between B and A. Not A, B and C. Have you ever been down there? When? Years ago. LEVINE: Yeah. ORATOFSKY: That was the east side. You know, on Avenue C they had markets on the street. Did you know that? Did you ever see that? LEVINE: For food, you mean. ORATOFSKY: Food, yeah. And I had an uncle there who had a store. He sold everything. I don't remember. He sold paper. Thighs like that, paper and things. I don't remember. My father's brother. But we had it good. LEVINE: Was it a mixed neighborhood? Were there all different, were there people from all different countries there? ORATOFSKY: Most of them Jews. A lot of people came in, loads. The boat, how many people take a boat? A boat takes in loads of them. LEVINE: Do you remember anything else that struck you as different when you first came? ORATOFSKY: That struck me, my sister Theresa, we never had electric, and we lived on the second floor, two flights up. And Theresa, she was the one three years older than me. And the landlord was saving money and didn't put the light on daytime. It was dark coming down. We lived on the third floor. So my sister came down, and steps had reinforcement, you know, metal? What is that called? LEVINE: Like a strip of metal so . . . ORATOFSKY: Yeah. And my sister tripped. It was dark. She didn't, she ran down, or what, she missed a step, and she fell. And we had an ambulance take her to Bellevue. Not, is it Bellevue that, a big hospital. And she cut her face over there, here, this way. ( she gestures ) She fell against the stair. She missed, it was dark. The landlord wouldn't put the light on day time. So when my older sister, Rose, took her doctor, and, you know, somebody said to my sister that you could sue the landlord. So she, my sister was stupid. She was the Americana, and she didn't want to sue. She wanted to be nice. She said, "Well, if we'll sue, they'll send her home because she, they'll think that she'll be a burden on the government because she's sick." And she wouldn't allow to get a doctor or nothing. They didn't even stitch it up. I don't know what they did. Years later my sister said, "I could have been a rich woman." The one who was here seven years didn't let her go to have a doctor. She said, "I'm afraid they'll send her back." Because my sister was a little silly. But she was okay, and she was mentally all right. She didn't want to call a doctor and make a case out of it. LEVINE: Tell me about, in Hungary. What did you have for medicals? What did you do if somebody got sick? What kinds of . . . ORATOFSKY: Oh, we had doctors, beautiful, very good doctors. We lived in a, not in a village where there's, where it was (?). We, the whole city was paved. That's supposed to be A-1. We had a gymnasium for boys. Over there boys, girls don't go with boys together. I had to go to school. If my mother didn't send Theresa to school or me, she got a summons. They wanted to put my mother in jail. ( she laughs ) It was a modern city. But there were a lot of goyas. They were anti-Semitic. LEVINE: So did you . . . ORATOFSKY: But it was a beautiful city. LEVINE: When you first came here did you, were you treated like a greenhorn? ORATOFSKY: What? Say that again? LEVINE: Were you treated like a greenhorn by anybody when you first came? ORATOFSKY: No. We were, you know, in two weeks we knew everything. ( she laughs ) We didn't speak well English, but my sister would say, "What time is the clock?" ( she laughs ) She would meet, once, the policeman, she said to the policeman, "What time is the clock? I go to work, work, work." But they picked it up very fast, young people pick it up. LEVINE: So did you like school when you were here? ORATOFSKY: I didn't like school because I was big and tall. I was already thirteen, fourteen. 4-B, they put me into 4-A, 4-B. And how old were they in 4-A? LEVINE: About ten. ORATOFSKY: Ten years old, and I was already thirteen. So I was ashamed, but the teacher liked me. Her name was Gisella. We called her aunt. I don't know, I think Gisella means Aunt Gisella, we called, in Europe. So . . . LEVINE: In Europe or here? ORATOFSKY: In Europe, not here. Oh, wait. Where did I have that? No, I had an American teacher. What was her, she wanted to skip me, and I refused. LEVINE: Why did you refuse? ORATOFSKY: Because I was self-conscious. I says, "I'm big, and they're little children. I can't go to school with them. I don't want to go to school." LEVINE: But if she skipped you, you'd be with bigger . . . ORATOFSKY: She wanted to skip me but she said, "You know the work. You don't have to be, go to." I says, "I don't want to skip." I refused. Stupid. I was ashamed because I went with little children. They taught me. I learned fast. I learned very fast. Then I became sixteen or fourteen. You had to go to school. And I, my sister wanted me to go to learn bookkeeping. I says, "I don't want to go to bookkeeping. I want to go . . ." I went to continuation school. You know what that is? They had from fourteen to sixteen you had to go to continuation school. LEVINE: So you went during the day or night? ORATOFSKY: Day, day time. LEVINE: So you finished that? ORATOFSKY: I finished it, but it didn't amount. Then I went to work. When I was sixteen I got, I had working papers, I think, to be eighteen, I don't know. LEVINE: What did you do for your first job? ORATOFSKY: I worked in Macy's Christmas time, down in the basement wrapping Christmas presents. I didn't learn much. I never had a decent job. I don't know why. LEVINE: So did you go to, like, social clubs? Were there people that came . . . ORATOFSKY: No, I was shy all the time. I don't know why. LEVINE: And did your mother turn out to like America, or not? ORATOFSKY: Nah, she, she was here, we came in February. She had money. My sisters had to give her part of their pay. I was the only one who went to school till sixteen. She said she don't like America. The air is not good in America, not like where I come from. So she went to, what's the Jewish country place that only the Jews go there, the immigrants came? I forgot the name of it. She went to the country when she was here the first year. She says, "I need the air. This is not like in Europe. The American air is no good." So she went to the country. She liked herself. She had money. LEVINE: How did your mother and father get along, having been separated? ORATOFSKY: My mother was fighting all the time. My mother cursed my father. My father was quiet. But my father never learned English, never became a citizen. My mother became a citizen. My sister was here seven years. My mother was a witness for her. My sister never became a citizen until we came to America. And my mother, she used to sit outside with her chair and read the paper. She was the first one to become a citizen. She was a pain. You know what a pain is? LEVINE: Well, did your mother work at all when she came? ORATOFSKY: No, she worked. She made the children give them the money from their pay. She amassed a fortune. We didn't know, when she died, she left a lot of money. We didn't get a penny out of it. She married, my father was dead already, so she married a crocket. You know what a crocket is? ( she laughs ) And he must have stolen her money, because she had a stroke, but before she had a stroke she went to the hospital. She said, under the Frigidaire we had a cover. Under the cover is money. There was no money. She remarried, but we didn't get a penny. She married from a stroke, I mean, she died from a stroke. She never liked America. I don't know why she had it put here. She never did a thing. We did all the work. We had five, a living room and a dining room. We had a dining room, you know in those years you had dining rooms? You know that? And a small bedroom there, and a small bedroom at the other end, and my two sisters slept in an opening bed in the, in the dining room. So on my, I couldn't fall asleep. I slept with my sister Rose, and I couldn't fall asleep. I said, "Papa is snoring. I can't sleep." We slept at this end, Papa was up there, near the street, the window. She says, Rose says, I slept with Rose. She says, "Get up slowly and knock on his door and tell him to stop snoring. Wake him up." So I took a walk through the dining, we had a beautiful living room, new furniture. We came here like millionaires, I'm telling you. So I didn't, the door, the door was open, and I found my father in bed with my mother. So I quickly ran back into the bedroom. I says, "Rose, Papa is in bed with Mama." "All right," she says, "then go back to sleep." She didn't like my mother, I mean, my father, but she liked to sleep in. She had seven children. LEVINE: All the, did she have more children? ORATOFSKY: Before. LEVINE: No. Not, she didn't have any more once she came here. ORATOFSKY: No. LEVINE: Okay. So when did your meet your husband? ORATOFSKY: Uh . . . LEVINE: What were the circumstances? ORATOFSKY: You know, I don't remember. How can you figure it out? Figure it out. ( she laughs ) I met him through a Hungarian. My mother had a friend, a Hungarian woman. And I went up, she was making dresses for actresses, sewing, and she had an abnormal child, a boy. And she hired a man to teach him Jewish. He understood a little, but he was real abnormal, you know, those with drooling all the time, but at times they talk. So I went to look for my mother, and I land, I went up to this woman, she lived on Avenue A. She made dresses for actresses. She made a living. And I went up there. I says to her, "Is my mother here?" She said, "Yeah. Why are you looking for your mother? I see a young fellow here. Meet the young fellow who's teaching my son Jewish, Hebrew." And that's where I met my husband, and from there he took me home. I says, "How come you're teaching?" He says, "Well, I work in a laundry. My father . . ." His father was a laundry man, so he worked with him, but he didn't like it. So to make side money, he was teaching. And he took me there, he took me home and he fell in love with me. And to get out of the house, I married him. I didn't have a wedding, nothing. We ran away to City Hall and got married. But he was okay. He wasn't so bad. LEVINE: What was his name? ORATOFSKY: He never cursed. (?) didn't get along with Paul. LEVINE: What was your husband's name? ORATOFSKY: Salamonchic. ( she laughs ) That's what his mother called him. Sal, Solomon. LEVINE: And you have one child. His name? ORATOFSKY: I had another one. He was born Tay Sachs. You know what Tay Sachs is? I had a child born with Tay Sachs. I says to the doctor, "Why did they pick me for that? How come they picked me to have a child Tay Sach disease?" I said, "Nobody has it in the family." He says, "I should know." He was a doctor, my cousin. So he got sick, so my doctor said, "Take him to the hospital. Don't say nothing, you don't know from nothing, don't say what's wrong with him, and leave him there, no matter what they say, leave him there, because you can't handle him." He was a year old, and he didn't sit up, he didn't know me. He was always leaning. It was so pitiful. I says, "Why me?" She says, "What can you do? It's misfortune." And he lived, I don't remember how long, a couple of months. And then he said, my, Sol let him know that the baby died. He said, "Don't let Helen go to the cemetery." So I didn't go. So I said, "Can I have another baby? Will it be born like that?" He said, "No, never. You go right ahead and have another baby." LEVINE: So what did your name your other baby? ORATOFSKY: Daniel. Daniel, I forgot his name. Do you know? What? LEVINE: No, the son that you have, say his name for the tape. ORATOFSKY: Paul. Yeah. LEVINE: So you have one son, Paul, and you have a grandson? I'm saying this so it's on the tape. ORATOFSKY: Oh. Well, so, then I had Paul. Oh, he was beautiful. He was eight pounds, with hair, long hair, blonde. He was gorgeous. LEVINE: Well, when you look back over your life, and you talk about, you know, starting out in Hungary and coming here, what difference do you think it made to you that you started there and ended up here? ORATOFSKY: Well, what would I have ended up being in Europe? Nothing. Married, some cloths, and who knows who. They never made a living. Who made a living there? So I was lucky that I could come to America. It's a different life. But I, at first I corresponded with a girlfriend of mine. She said she missed me, in Hungarian, you know. LEVINE: What are you most proud of? What makes you feel proud? ORATOFSKY: That I came here? LEVINE: In your life. ORATOFSKY: Nothing. I did nothing to make myself proud. ( she laughs ) LEVINE: Well, what . . . ORATOFSKY: I always had an inferiority complex. Do you know what that is? It's very bad. LEVINE: Why do you think you have that? ORATOFSKY: I don't know. I was more sensitive than my other sisters. I was the youngest. They liked me, they were good to me, but I was different. I felt different. LEVINE: What do you feel satisfied about in your life? ORATOFSKY: Well, I hadn't accomplished anything to be proud of except giving birth to Paul and raising him. Look what I got. You know, did you ever see, should I show you, should I show you his . . . LEVINE: His baby pictures? ORATOFSKY: No, the album, the school. Oh, he was excellent. He was A all the way through. I was very proud of him. That's the only thing. I wasn't a happy child, because I was the last one, and I realized a lot of things that my other sisters were occupied, they got jobs. I was never good at anything. I don't know why. I was the seventh child. I saw my mother's fault. My mother was a very mean woman. And my older sister didn't tell it to me but she told it to Theresa next to me. My mother had seven babies, and three of them, they were all girls, and she didn't want girls, and she put, in Europe, you know how, in Europe they take a new baby and they have those thin pillows, not like this, they're square, and they wrap the baby up in them while they're very tiny, and my mother put something over three of the children, and they died, suffocated. She was never caught, but Sylvia knew about it. She told Sylvia. She didn't want girls. She says, "All girls, all girls. (Hebrew), only girls." So she blamed my father. She can't. In Europe they don't go into it like here. The baby died, he suffocated, the doctors don't come and examine it. They buried her. They were all girls. My mother did it. My mother was so mean. She was mean to Theresa. She didn't like Theresa, very mean. So what do you have with a mother like that? You know, she liked me, because I was the youngest. I looked like her. Is that enough to like a child? LEVINE: Well, it seems like you were a good mother, even though you didn't have a good mother. ORATOFSKY: Look what I have. LEVINE: And you have a grandson. ORATOFSKY: Oh, he's gorgeous. He, you know, he called me up. A week ago he called me up that he's not happy. They went to Germany. Why did he go to Germany? LEVINE: Say his name for the tape, your grandson. ORATOFSKY: Uh, Daniel, what's his middle name? You should know. LEVINE: Mark. ORATOFSKY: Ooh. She remembers and you don't. ( addressing another person in the room ) LEVINE: The tape is just about over. Is there any last thing you want to say? ORATOFSKY: Is that all? LEVINE: Before the tape is through. ORATOFSKY: Well, I'm very happy that I came to America. LEVINE: Okay. ORATOFSKY: But if I never accomplished much, it wasn't because I didn't want, I was shy, brought up with a mother like that didn't do much for me. LEVINE: Okay. I think we'll close here. I'm talking with Helen Oratofsky. It's August 1, 1993. You're eighty-six now, right? ORATOFSKY: Eighty-six. I was eighty-six May . . . LEVINE: And this is Janet Levine for the National Park Service.