DALLETT: My name is Nancy Dallett, and I'm speaking with Patrick Peak on Friday, November 15, 1985. We are beginning this interview at 1:05, and we are about to interview Mr. Peak about his immigration experience from Scotland in 1921. This is the beginning of interview number 084. Take me back to the beginning of your story and could you tell me where and when you were born? PEAK: Oh, I was born in Glasgow, Scotland, 1912, June the 25th as one of a family of nine. Uh, I was born in Pomerdy [ph], Scotland and, uh, there was Mary, Jack, Betty, June, Sadie, myself, Joe, Margaret, Kitty, that was, uh, all of the family. DALLETT: Uh-huh. What did your father do in, in Scotland? PEAK: Uh, well, he had been a printer in Glasgow, but there had been a big strike in the printing business and he left there to go to the tramways, which were the trolleys. And he was working in the trolleys at the time he left to come to this country. The rest of, Mary, she worked in a co-op store and, uh, all these kids, they worked in little part-time jobs, you know, around the neighborhood. But I think in 19, 1920, when Mary decided to come to this country, and that was the start of the Peak family emigrating to United States. DALLETT: Why was it that she was the one that began that immigration to this country, and why this country? PEAK: Well, it was mainly because, uh, we, she had an aunt and uncle up in Holyoke that had come out there previously about three years before and, like all the girls, young girls, sometimes they just want to get away on their own, you know. You know that. ( he laughs ) But different things I remember about over there, previous to when we left for this country was, well, I remember a parade with King George and the Queen, I think it was Queen Elizabeth at that time, coming down the streets of Glasgow. And looking back now it must have been, uh, at the end of World War One. It may have been a victory parade or something, but I can still see King George and the Queen coming down in this horse-drawn carriage, open carriage. And that was one of the things that I remember. And different, uh, also, during the war, I remember going over to see a German plane that had been shot down in Glasgow. Seems to me as though it was made more of wood and canvas, you know, the whole thing. At that time, they didn't really use planes for much outside of surveillance, because it was before the time when where they had developed bombs, although they had developed the machine gun, you know. DALLETT: Were, were your father or any, did you have older brothers, were they involved in the war, World War One? PEAK: Uh, well, my cousin had a, a young brother. Her name was Brady, it was John Brady, and he was in the cavalry, the British Cavalry. But I remember being told that he was shot. His horse was shot from under him and he'd be laying in the battlefield all night before they found him the next morning. He survived that, but he later died from his wounds. DALLETT: Do you remember when it was that your sister, uh, left home? PEAK: I don't remember just what time of year it as. No, it was just after the war, I think, when she decided to leave, to come over here. DALLETT: And she was going to come stay with an uncle and aunt, who were already . . . PEAK: An uncle and aunt in Holyoke. DALLETT: Uh-huh. And then what happened? How long was she here before someone else started to come? PEAK: Well, she couldn't have been here much more than six months when, uh, Betty and my oldest brother, my oldest sister and my oldest brother, they decided to come out. DALLETT: Do you remember receiving letters from your sister saying what life was like here? PEAK: Well, we did, but I couldn't, uh, I really couldn't saying what life was like here? PEAK: Well, we did, but I couldn't uh, I really couldn't say when or how often or what. DALLETT: Sure. Did you have any expectation? Did you know that you would then also be coming to this country? PEAK: Oh, I knew eventually, yeah. DALLETT: Did you have any idea? PEAK: Well, it was shortly after that that, uh, my father and my other brother came out. But he, he really, he hated it over here because he was quite a soccer player over in the old country, you know, and he belonged to quite a few clubs and all that stuff and he left everyone. When he come over here he got the worst job, actually, over here than he ever had in the old country, you know. So he, I remember, he wrote and told my mother he was coming back, but my mother outsmarted him. She sent a telegram back and said, "You can't come back. I already booked our passage." Which she hadn't done, but she wanted to hold him here, you know. So it was shortly after that, within about five or six months, when all the rest of us came out. But, uh, different things, like on vacation, believe it or not, even back then my mother was able to take, well, all the kids that were still in school, on a vacation to different, uh, well, down the coast of Scotland you come across, come to small, uh, seashore town like (?), the Isle of Melport and Rossi. And, uh, one of these places we all, she always managed to take us on a two-week vacation. And she did this because, at that time, over there, they had what they called co-ops. They have them in this country too, now. But back then if you belonged to one of these co-ops at the end of the year you'd get a set percentage of what you spent in these co-ops. And this is how she would go on vacation. She'd claim that once a year and there'd be enough in there to go on vacation. Either the island, or some of these smaller towns on the coast of Scotland. DALLETT: Tell me, if you can, um, what it was like when, uh, your mother had booked the passage, and you were about to begin the journey to come to this country. PEAK: Oh, I remember in schools, yeah, all the kids were, "Ooh, he's going to America, going to America." You know, all that. And back then, of course, when you came to America you could dig, you could pick up gold practically on the backyard lots, you know. This is what the kids thought. And you could pick bananas and fruit off the tree. You know, life, life of plenty in the east. Which you find that isn't quite so. When you get over here you still have to work for a living. DALLETT: Where did you leave from? PEAK: Uh, we left from, uh, Glasgow. Glasgow was right on the River Clyde and that's quite, that was quite a ship building area at that time, you know. The Clyde was one of the biggest ship building areas in the world. And we left from the Clyde, and the Clyde opened right out into the North Seat. DALLETT: Do you remember actually leaving that day, what you were traveling with? PEAK: Oh, I remember. Yeah, I remember leaving the dock. In fact, one of my uncles, I can still see him running down the dock. He was coming down late to see us off. And my mother and my older sister, "There's, there's Uncle So-and-so." I can still see him running down the dock and waving like mad, because he had missed us. He hadn't even been able to say goodbye to us, you know. But the journey over, that was the Cameronia, which has been scrapped for a good many years now. But, uh, the only thing I remember about that trip was this, to me, I knew he was Portuguese, the older ones in the family told me later, but he took an interest in me. And he was immigrating, too. And he took me all over that ship. Yeah, I'll never forget that, you know. And he had a, he was dressed just like a regular seaman at that time. And that was one thing that stuck in my mind. DALLETT: What did he show you? PEAK: Oh, he took me down the engine room, he took me up to the captain's quarters, up to the deck, and all over the ship. There's one spot, they call it the Devil's Hole, coming down through from Newfoundland, I think from Glasgow they come down through Newfoundland and up in that area. It's a very stormy area nine times out of ten. And I remember the waves were coming over the deck about twenty, thirty, forty feet high. And I thought, at the time, the ship was going down, because that captain, at that time, took it on himself to put on a rehearsal for abandoning ship, you know. And I remember we were all up on the deck and they were showing us how to buckle the lifebelts on, and how to get into the lifeboats. And to me ( he laughs ) that's what I was thinking, this ship is going down, you know. But that's all it was. It was just a rehearsal in case something did happen, you know. DALLETT: And who was traveling on that ship with you? Which of your brothers and sisters? PEAK: Well, there happened to be some relatives that had been out in this country and they went over the old country on a visit, and they happened to pick this ship to come back. So, yeah, I think they were cousins of mine. And I remember them coming and taking us through their quarters up, up where the tourists were. At that time, it seemed so different from where we were down below in the hold someplace, you know. They were up in the regular captain's ballroom and all that stuff, dining room, where we were just seated at a regular wooden plank table, you know, where all the immigrants were brought over. As far as meals I don't remember what the meals were. It didn't make too much impression on me, so I couldn't have been too good. ( he laughs ) DALLETT: How about your sleeping quarters? Did you have, uh, your own . . . PEAK: Regular bunks. Regular. DALLETT: and how long was the trip? PEAK: Five-and-a-half, six days. DALLETT: Uh, do you remember when you came into the harbor? PEAK: Yep. The first thing I remember, everybody was called, well, everybody went up on deck and, uh, we could see the Statue of Liberty. Ellis Island, I didn't notice at that time, I only noticed that when they put us over here. But at that time, I'm sure, we landed in New York Harbor first, and from there they transferred the people who would be detained to Ellis Island. I don't think, at that time, Ellis Island was actually embarkation. I think they went into New York and from there all the ones that were passed through your different, uh, immigration officers and all that stuff, they were shipped right from New York to wherever they were going. But the ones that were being detained, theses were the ones that they sent over to Ellis Island, you know. DALLETT: And what happened to you and your family? PEAK: Well, when we were through the physical, as far as I can remember, the youngest one, the baby in the family, had a, a mark right here, ( he gestures ) a round mark. And they thought at first it was ringworm, which is a very communicable disease, you know, not disease, but sickness, it was a, and all, all, all, all that type of immigrant, this is what thye wanted to prevent from coming into the country because, after all, they didn't want to start taking care of sick people, cripples, and this. You know, your health had to be, you know, pretty normal, before they even let you in. So these are the ones that were held back. These they shipped over to Ellis Island to be detained until that was cleared up. DALLETT: So where is it that you had this first medical examination? That was actually on the ship, before you docked, is that right? PEAK: No, I think I was, uh, I think I was on New York dock. DALLETT: At the dock. PEAK: After they, after we embarked in New York. Because I remember, uh, pop had come up from New Bedford and he come over to see us and he was very disappointed that we were being held over, you know. And after there they put you on the ferry and took you over to Ellis Island. DALLETT: So, tell me, tell me what happened at Ellis Island. PEAK: Oh, Ellis Island, to me it was just one big jumble of hundreds of thousands of people in this big hall. And they were all in different, different aisles, going here, there and all over, for different parts of this examination. And, uh . . . DALLETT: Did you have to go through the, another, an examination there? What was that like? PEAK: Well, it was more or less a, more or less a physical, where they look at your throat, your ears, your eyes, and a general physical. DALLETT: Did you, were you separated from your mother and your sisters and brothers then, or . . . PEAK: More than, we went through the physical all together. DALLETT: And what happened, uh, what happened after that? PEAK: Well, as far as I remember that's when they shipped us over in the ferryboat, over to Ellis Island. DALLETT: Uh-huh. Okay. PEAK: And then we went through a process there, examinations again, and that's when they, they detained you for, some people are let go, maybe just kept them on for a night. Maybe they were gone the next morning. Some people, before, they all were able to be passed through. It might be a week or even two weeks before they straightened out that affair, you know. But I remember the sister told me just the other night, we were there six days. DALLETT: What did you do for six days there? PEAK: Oh, Lord, I don't remember. There was, one thing I wanted was some paper and a couple of crayons or pencils, because I always, like most kids, drew a lot, you know. And I didn't get a piece of paper or a pencil until my father came in the middle of the week. And he brought a priest with him. I imagine he wanted to see if a priest would be of help in getting us released sooner, you know. I remember he, he brought some paper and pencils at that time. But, uh . . . DALLETT: Do you remember where you slept, or . . . PEAK: Well, that's what I'm saying. At night, the male, male and the female were separated. And I remember we ended up in a big cage, like. It was all, all covered around with wire, and there's so many bunks and that. And before you, you went down this line, they gave each person a blanket. I don't even remember what kind of a bed we slept on. It could be on slats, wooden slats, for all I know. But that's the way we were for about six nights, you know. And in the morning they'd let you out to wash up and so forth and so on. And then after breakfast you generally had time out in that big yard right in the center of the building. DALLETT: But you could get back together with your family during the day? PEAK: During the day each family was back together again. And then when they did, when they got through with that, I remember when, when we left, when they sent us back into New York they tie a tag on your lapel with your destination, you know. So in case one of you get lost on the way they could find out, you know, where they should be going. DALLETT: Right. Do you remember any of the meals you might have had at Ellis Island? PEAK: The only meal I remember, I remember sitting up at the long table and I was thinking, "I wonder what we'll have to eat today." And I looked down, here's a big fish. To me it was about this, a head and all. And since then I keep thinking, I wonder if that was some kind of a holiday, you know, where they had, to me, uh, the fish didn't even look as though it had been cooked, you know. All I could see was this big fish, just on top of a dish in the middle of the table. That's all I remember. As far as any other meal, but, uh, I figure now it couldn't have been too good. ( he laughs ) Not with that crowd that was there, you know. DALLETT: So what happened that they finally let you go? Did they find what it was on your sister's cheek? PEAK: Well, they found it wasn't ringworm, it was just a rash. ( he sighs ) DALLETT: So they said you could go. PEAK: And, yeah, they released us, for . . . Of course, someone had to claim you at that time, you know. I think my father came up and claimed us. DALLETT: Your father had to come back and forth from New Bedford. PEAK: Yeah. Right. He must have come back about three times during the week, you know. And then the ship goes down to New Bedford and, what'd they call then, the old Fall River Line. You're probably too young to remember that. DALLETT: No, I don't know that. Where would you, where would you take that from? PEAK: Well, that was probably from the Battery, in New York. And it came down, right down, inside Long Island Sound. Not on the ocean side. Inside Long Island Sound. And it would stop at Bridgeport and all the major, New Haven, all the major towns on the course at that time. Because I remember it was at night. I, we slept on that ship. I remember riding to New Bedford the next morning, which was quite a sight because down there, at that time, they still have some of the old whaling ships tied up to the dock, you know, the Morgan. The Morgan used to be down there, which was an old whaling ship. And, uh . . . DALLETT: So were you pleased by what you saw when you woke up, when you found you were in America, or were you . . . PEAK: Oh, yeah. Well, like every kid, it's an adventure, you know. And you look forward to it. DALLETT: Uh-huh. PEAK: Especially the first snowstorm. We must have landed in New Bedford in October. Of course, in Scotland, you don't get too much snow. It's more or less, except up in the highlands, you know. But down in lower Scotland you might get maybe a half an inch or an inch, but it would be gone the next day because your weather was so mild, you know. but the first winter here I remember the first house we came to was a small cottage, single cottage, and that first winter I used to chip ice out of the sink. We didn't have a furnace. I forget just how they heated it. It must have been by the kitchen stove. I forget just how they heated it. It must have been by the kitchen stove. But I remember chipping ice out of the kitchen sink. And that winter when I, one morning I get up and open the kitchen door, and there was snow almost to the top of the door, which I couldn't believe. You know, that was so different from the old country. DALLETT: Did you find other things about the new country really different, or, how was it to adjust . . . PEAK: I got the worst sunburn I ever had in my life. Because over in Scotland, like I said, the climate is mild. People over there just go out and don't lie on the beach for hours at a time, you know. They're going for a swim, they're in and out. But down in New Bedford there's two or three beaches and I remember that first summer being light-skinned. Oh, my God, I can still feel that sunshine, blisters. I didn't get over that for about a month. I couldn't . . . You know, you were so used to it. And the whole family wasn't used to it. Probably the rest of them went through that, too, you know, as far as I can remember. DALLETT: So then were you enrolled in the public school? PEAK: Catholic school. DALLETT: Catholic school. And how was that to adjust? PEAK: I didn't go for it much. I had an awful school life in this country, because anyone that comes over here a foreigner with a foreign brogue, especially a Scottish brogue, he gets picked on every time he turns around. I think I got into more fights over there that I ever did with the kids over there in the old country. DALLETT: Were there, were there many kids in this area who had come from Scotland, or were you like . . . PEAK: Not too many. Town of New Bedford was quite a mixture. There was a lot of Portuguese down there, you know. They used to work on the whaling ships, I understand. And there was a lot of French and Scotch and Irish. It was a regular immigrant's town, almost. At that time they had the, all the big mills, the Wamsutta mills. They were, they made sheets and pillowcases. That was the one big industry in New Bedford at that time. In fact, the uncle, that my sister came down to New Bedford, he had been over, he must have been over here quite a few years, because he had quite a, a big position in the mills down there, superintendent or something like that, so. At that time that's all New Bedford was, was just a mill town, you know. But it was really one of the worst towns for anyone to come through from a, from the other side, because it was always sort of a poor town, you know. So when we were there, 1921, '22, and we started immigrating to Hartford, because work down in New Bedford, half of the town they were unemployed down there, you know. So one, I think, my oldest brother came to Hartford. From there on the rest of the family just ended up here. And then the drains that, uh, my sister, the ones up in Holyoke, then they came down to Hartford, because things up there were similar to New Bedford. It was just a mill town up there too, you know. So we all ended up in the Hartford location. DALLETT: So how long was it, uh, how many years did it take before, uh, kids stopped picking on you and you didn't feel . . . PEAK: Oh, I can't remember them stopping picking on me. See that fiddle up there? I used to walk down the streets for fiddle lessons and I'd get more, into more damn trouble. I broke that fiddle over a kid's head one time. No, they, they never eased up because, well, we were in New Bedford '21, '22 to '26, I think, we come up here, about four, five years in New Bedford. DALLETT: And how about your father? Did he, uh, decide that he liked it any better after he was adjusted and the family was here? PEAK: Well, he, the family was, all the family was here, so he had to like it, you know. But now when he came back, when he come up to Hartford, he got back into the printing trade, which he'll like a lot more, you know. ( he yawns ) But he managed to finally take it in stride and, you know, get accepted. DALLETT: And then what kind of work did you go into? PEAK: Well, I left school early. I went into the Aetna insurance when I was about fifteen, fifteen-and-a-half. And I left there, I stayed there about nine years, eight, nine years, and then I left there and right in the middle of the Depression I left. I hated that place, you know, I left in the middle of the Depression. I think there were, three or four years after that I finally got a permanent job over in the aircraft there when all the war work started coming in, you know. And I spent, that's where I spent the rest of my life with Pratt Littman, in the aircraft. DALLETT: Okay. When was it that you got American citizenship? PEAK: Oh, I came under my father's papers. At that time, if you're under eighteen, you automatically became a citizen. So when he became a citizen there was one, two, three, three of us under age that became citizens. DALLETT: And, uh, the only other thing I need to ask you is do you have any of the original papers, uh . . . PEAK: Yeah, I think I have a copy . . . DALLETT: Maybe a visa, a passport, or a ticket, ship tickets, or . . . PEAK: Oh, Lord, no. DALLETT: Citizenship paper? PEAK: Oh, I got my father's citizenship paper. What did I do with that? ( voice off mike ) Where? DALLETT: You said you might have a copy of one? Is it a citizenship paper that you might have a copy of? You're tied in, you're tied in. PEAK: Yeah. My father's, my father's. I thin kit's in that accordion folder in there. DALLETT: Well, I just need to ask because the Park Service wants to know who has what kind of papers, so I'm just going to make a note whether you do have any of those papers. PEAK: Oh, yeah, I, I have my father's original, I have my original birth certificate from Scotland. DALLETT: Okay. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to and, uh, I thank you very much. PEAK: Oh, good. DALLETT: That is the end of side one and the end of interview number 084 with Patrick Peak.