APPLEBOME: This is Edward Applebome, and I'm speaking with Mrs. Angelina Real [Rio], on Friday, October 11, 1985. We are beginning this interview at 2:20 in the afternoon. We are about to interview Mrs. Real [Rio] about her immigration experience from Sicily, Italy in 1920. Mrs. Rio, and, it was, your maiden name is Real . . . RIO: Right. APPLEBOME: Where and when were you born? RIO: I was born the 9th October, 1900. APPLEBOME: And in what city? RIO: Siracusa. APPLEBOME: In Sicily. RIO: Sicily, right. APPLEBOME: And what was life like for you as a child growing up there? RIO: Well, it was great because I want to, I was the younger one in my family, although I had another brother I still have. But I was younger than, everybody treat me good because I was excellent at the school, I was good at the school, and my father was so proud because I was good at the school. My grades were super. That's it. They treat me the best. The others was supposed to do this, supposed to do that, just study, read the book, read the paper, that was my time. APPLEBOME: What were the studies that you were so good in? RIO: Well, we had, my school, where I went, they used to open the, biblioteca, in Italiano, but in English you say, like, when you go to the, library, they used to call it, the library, the used to say, a new one, they never had before. But they had me, and my chum, we was goin' crazy about the, to read a book, bring back, take another one. They was gone so good for that, you know, because, we had a new library at school. APPLEBOME: Could the other people in your family read? RIO: Well, they can, but not as much. No. APPLEBOME: What did your family do for a living? RIO: My father was an agriculture, he had a, he had a piece of land and he make a vegetables. And my brother was older than me, he used to go sell, next to town. Because he had all kinds of vegetables, he used to work there. APPLEBOME: How large was the village that you lived in? RIO: Siracusa? Well, it can't compete with the, it's a city. Was I loud? APPLEBOME: IT's all right. We can continue. RIO: IT was a good size city, where I was. APPLEBOME: And . . . RIO: Twenty-five thousand habi, habitante. APPLEBOME: And were you happy growing up there? RIO: Very much. Yes, I was. APPLEBOME: And what made you decide to come to the United States? RIO: Well, I was, as I say, till sixth grade, I was continuing school, the professional school, they call, that's the name of the school. And I was there another couple of years. By this time, I get to be sixteen, you know, seventeen, anyway, I don't remember exactly. Said I better open up a private school, for me, you know, to make some money. And I did. This went so great, this private school, that I had children all around. So I, I, I rent a room near where I live, you know, to continue this private school. And I was happy to do that. And I had just boys and girls. Came time that I had too many. I said, "I'm not gonna have boys, I just want girls." And the mother came over and says, "Angelina, please, I have no one to take my boy to school. This way they go together with the sister and I know he's well taken care," this and that. I just wanted just girls, and I had just girls, but they was bigger than me, practically, but I was instructing them to embroidery and to schooling, I was. This school give me some profit, tremendous, because one came to the first, one the ten, one the twenty, bring the monthly dues, you know, dues, they used to pay five lira at the time. APPLEBOME: Were these wealthy families, the families that were sending their children? RIO: All kinds, all kinds, all kinds. And I had a drawer there and I put the money there, Senorina Real, this mine, this mine, and I had quite a bit of money accumulated there. So I said, "My goodness, I have this lira, they're not worth much here. If I go in a and I open a school there, I get the dollars." But, to my mind, tell me that. So I said, "Mama, I'd like to go," because I had my sister and my brother there already. My brother came in 1910. I said, "I want to go in America, you see, all this money, it's not worth too much. I go in America, I do the same thing and I make dollars." She said, "No, don't go in America. Your America's right here." She said that, you know, you obey when you're young. And I was. Still, I wasn't satisfied with the intention my mother had to stay there and continue that way. I said, "Oh, I want to go in America." So, what I did, I went to this, I know this friend of ours, the husband was in Boston, was a paisano, you know, was a friend with my brother, and the husband called to his wife, and I say, you know, I went to there, to the house, "You go to Boston, and you must see my brother there. Tell my brother that I want to come in America and my husband, my mother no want me to come. Please do that for me." And that's what she did. Because my mother say you got America over here, why you wanna go there for? If you go I'll come with you, you don't go by yourself. The lady did the papers, you got, we got to save that paper, that he, he called for us, because I had a brother fourteen years old at the time, and he called for us a trip to come to this country. My mother was surprised, she said, "Oh, you see." I said, "Pepinai [ph] George, he wants us in America." i did not say I went through the lady. "He wants us in America." You see, he sent us the money, he sent us the papers you need those days. And we came, we sell everything we had in the house, everything, the furniture we had . . . APPLEBOME: What did your father have to say about all this? RIO: No, this was, I was starting to say in the beginning, my father was dead already, he died 1918. My father was no longer with us. This happened 1920. APPLEBOME: Do you think you would have wanted to leave if your father had stayed alive? RIO: Well, I could stay there, while he was alive, I don't think so, but the change and everything. So that's what I would decide, my mother was convinced to come, and the three of us, my younger brother, the three of us, if she sell everything, and we'd come over. It was the 30th of January, 1920. It took a long time on the boat. The boat's name is Giuseppe Verdi. APPLEBOME: What port did you leave from? RIO: It was, New York. Well, we got the boat in Naples. Yeah. From, from Palermo, we stopped in Palermo, we took the ferryboat to go to Naples, that's where we, we went to Napoli to get the boat. APPLEBOME: And it was you, your mother and who else? RIO: And my brother. I still had my brother, younger than me, five years. APPLEBOME: Did you pay for the tickets with the money you had made at your school? RIO: No, I gave it to my mother, she paid, probably. But my brother sent the, the trip already paid, form here, yeah. I gave it to my mother, we used the money, sure. APPLEBOME: And what did you take with you when you left? RIO: Not much. Just clothes, the best clothes I could, because I had new clothes since my father died, I had all new clothes. Matter of fact, I don't buy clothes here after six months. Everybody thought that i bought. I said, "No, I got it from Italy." "Oh, they're beautiful." "Oh, yeah, I got it from Italy." That's when I come over. But we came Thanksgiving time. You know, it was a before, day before Thanksgiving. From January 30, 30, take us about eighteen or twenty days on the ocean. APPLEBOME: And what was the voyage like? RIO: Well, I never was on the boat before, I was sick all the way through. But my brother, he used to go to the dining room and take, whatever, container and bring me to the room that I was laying down. I couldn't eat. I just can eat a steak, a little piece of steak. Every day he used to buy that for me because I didn't eat the other food they serve to the rest. I couldn't smell, even, but I had the steak, that was all right for me. APPLEBOME: How was your mother doing? RIO: She was with me, too, but she wasn't, she had a little bit to eat, but a little like the food that they serve. APPLEBOME: Did you meet any people on the boat? RIO: When we was out on the chair, on the lounging chair, yes, we meet a couple of, but we don't know who they are now. But they leave, they wasn't go to Boston, they was going different places. So we don't keep, friendship with nobody. APPLEBOME: Were you traveling steerage? Third class? RIO: This class, yes. Was no such thing first, we don't know, and we have the agent, he provide us the room, I mean, the room, the trip, the agent, he, what day, what boat was gonna take, everything. APPLEBOME: Did your family have, um, a room to themselves? RIO: In Italy? RIO: No, when you were on the boat? APPLEBOME: No, I was with my mother, my brother. APPLEBOME: Right. Did the three of you have a private room? RIO: My brother. No, we had one room. Me, one, you know, the . . . APPLEBOME: Bunk bed. RIO: Yes, the bunk bed. Right. That's what we had. APPLEBOME: Did you have to pay anything extra on the boat to anybody? RIO: No, just, no, no. They was very nice to us, anyway. My mother tipped someone, probably, but me, I was, I was sick all the way through. APPLEBOME: So then, when you finally got to New York, what were your impressions when you came into the harbor? RIO: Yeah. Then they took me to this island, they took us, with the little ferry. APPLEBOME: Did you see the Statue of Liberty? RIO: That's, that's when I saw the Statue. I said, oh, what a beautiful thing it is. Yes. I had studied before, it was a donation from France, at the school. And I saw the Statue, close by we went, with the ferryboat, to take us to the Island. And we stayed there two days, that's all. APPLEBOME: Why were you held there two days? RIO: Because my brother was underage. They needed the one sponsor to be there to pick him up. They wouldn't let him go. Me, I could go right away out, but not my brother. So we were together, we wanted to be together. APPLEBOME: It wasn't sufficient that your mother was there with him? RIO: No, no. Of course, she was with him, but my brother was, he didn't want to sponsor us. APPLEBOME: Do you remember what were some of the questions they asked you? RIO: No. APPLEBOME: Or did, were you served any food? RIO: The food, as I say, my brother supplied with the steak every day, but we pay extra, not what they give us. And I survived with that. APPLEBOME: Where did you sleep when, on the nights that you stayed on Ellis Island? RIO: We, we sleep on the chair. Sit with the dress on. Or walk around, or whatever. APPLEBOME: Do you remember anything about the other people that were there, seeing people from other countries? RIO: No, there was only, walking around the room, talking, everything, and the night went by like that. Everything was accommodation to sleep, either. APPLEBOME: Do you remember the medical examination? RIO: Before the medical examination was just to see your eyes, that's all they was interest on, your eyes. Had to be good eyes. No other part of the body they care, just the yes. APPLEBOME: Did you see any people who didn't pass the exam? RIO: Yes. So a couple, I don't know, from Chicago, some other place, they no have good eyes, they was get, put aside. I don't know what happened after that. APPLEBOME: Were you worried that your family might be sent back? RIO: Before you get there, but when we was all right with the eyes, I wasn't worry a bit. I was happy for being on land in America. Because it was my idea to come. APPLEBOME: Did you have to show them that you had money? RIO: No, no. They don't ask that question. APPLEBOME: So who finally came and met you? RIO: My brother and my brother-in-law, for company's sake. My brother-in-law no need to come, but he want, he want to come too, so they both came. My brother, one sponsor, and my brother-in-law, they both came. APPLEBOME: They came down from Boston? RIO: Right. APPLEBOME: And they traveled out to Ellis Island that day? RIO: Right, right. Yeah. APPLEBOME: Did you recognize him when he came? RIO: Oh, yeah, from the picture. Oh, yes, I did. APPLEBOME: So what, what did you and your mother and brother do when you finally saw him? RIO: I cried. ( she laughs ) Yeah, was embracing ourselves and everything. Sure was very happy to see them come and pick us up. Then we, we take the elevator, the first time I see the elevator, not the subway, the elevator line . . . APPLEBOME: The elevated train. RIO: Right. Right, yeah. And we went to the station, and we get the train to Boston. We came by train. Yes. APPLEBOME: Had you ever seen a train before. RIO: Oh, yes, oh, gee, sure. APPLEBOME: So what did you think when you saw New York City, Manhattan, the big buildings? RIO: Oh, the big buildings, that impressed me, sure. But that, not too much, because when you read the books and things, the pictures, I know, I had an idea. But when you saw them near, it's even better yes. APPLEBOME: You were pleased? RIO: Oh, very much so. I pleased myself, because it was my idea. My mother said, "You're not gonna go in America. If you go, I got to come with you. If you suffer, we suffer together. If we enjoy it, we enjoy it together." That was her idea, that's what we ended up with. APPLEBOME: If your mother hadn't been wiling to come, would you have gone on your own? RIO: I wanted to come my own, but she wouldn't let me. Nowadays anymore, nowadays what they want to do they do, the children. They don't obey the mother or father. APPLEBOME: So what did you do when you finally got here? RIO: Oh, it was Thanksgiving, they had the chicken, the turkey, whatever, my brother, my sister-in-law . . . APPLEBOME: In Boston? RIO: In Boston, yes. APPLEBOME: Where in Boston? RIO: The North End. That's where all the Italians find a place in those days. Yes, and we have a, meals, but the questions was, please. APPLEBOME: What did you think about being in Boston? What did you do? RIO: I went to work. A couple of days, you know. Even, my sister-in-law's niece, she was working on clothing, those days was, now no more anyway, she was working. So, my sister-in-law niece, she took me with her, she said, "I know they're gonna take you. You better come with me." And I ask the boss to, and that's why she find a job right away. For me, and I was working there, Friend Street, in those days, Friend Street in Boston. APPLEBOME: Did you, were you ever able to set up your school? RIO: No. I didn't have a chance. They took me to the factory where there's sewing machine, whatever. That was my intention, but, uh, I had no language, how could I open? I thought I could speak Italian, like, didn't work the way I visualized, that's all. APPLEBOME: Did you still like it, though? Were you pleased that you came to Boston? RIO: Oh, yes. Because I, I worked right away, I used to make fifteen dollars, fifteen dollars was quite a money in dollars, was no lira, and I was happy. APPLEBOME: What did your mother do? RIO: My mother, she went to work, too, because my brother was young, we have to pay room and board for my brother, he only gave us one room, we had to pay for the food, for the room, so my mother went to work at the factory, over where they make the candy. It's closed now, but that's where she went to work, was enough to take the transportation, because it was walking distance. So mine, so me, the same thing. I used to work, Friend Street was close from the house, no need the transportation. APPLEBOME: How many hours a day would you work? RIO: I think eight to five, the way now, still on that way, I guess. Right. APPLEBOME: And was your mother satisfied to be here, or did she want to go back? RIO: I wanted to go back. APPLEBOME: You wanted to go back? RIO: Oh, my goodness, I had a stack of mail this much to write to all my friends and everything, how much disappointed I was and everything. And then the time go by and you forget, you know. APPLEBOME: What was it that you were so disappointed in? RIO: I went to work, to the clothing factory. Over there I was treated like a queen, over here I had to work to live. Because we had to pay room and board. Sure. You don't et it easy in this, in this world all the time. I wanted to go back in the worst way. APPLEBOME: So how come you didn't? RIO: Oh, yes, I was happy that I didn't. Right. Because after four years I met my husband, after four years I was here. APPLEBOME: How did you meet him? RIO: Well, that's another story. I had an uncle here in Lawrence, an uncle, my mother's brother, and we used to go Sunday, we used to go there, and he used to come to us, anyway. And my uncle, he knew him, the way he said it, he knew him, he said, "You know, I have a niece of mine from, uh, Siracusa, in Boston, where the brother is, my brother, but they come Sunday." He said, "If your intention to get married," must have said like that, I don't know, I wasn't there. He said, "Why don't you come and meet her Sunday?" You know. Because we was gonna, the only day we had, Sunday. I know, I expected them here Sunday. He said, "If you wanna be there, you come." Sure enough, he came that Sunday. I don't know. I think, about, we used to go there to have dinner, hear the gramophone play before, you know, you got to give wind, no electric, those days. I'm still talking about 1920. And then he came, he saw me, we, he, then following week he came to Boston. It was meant to be, it was meant. Yeah. APPLEBOME: You knew you were interested right away when you saw him? RIO: I was, no, the least idea. I had to get married right away, but he did. He proposed to me the following week, I think. How can I remember, you wasn't even born. 1920, I'm talking about. APPLEBOME: And where did you live, then? RIO: Well, in Boston, at the North End. I lived with my brother and my mother. But we rent a, an apartment for ourself, the three of us, because my sister-in- law, she had another baby, it was too crowded to be together. And me, my mother, my younger brother, we rent apartment, but nearby, where my brother, little brother was. And we live by ourself. APPLEBOME: Besides finding a husband, what were some of the things here that were better than what you would have in Sicily? RIO: I couldn't say that. What's better in, meat line, you know, food line, there was more. Because over there it was limited, the meat, especially. We had, here, all we want especially, I was working, my mother, too. And my sister-in-law, she was having the meal every night ready for us, you know. Yeah. In that subject, yes. It was better for that reason. We had everything we wanted. APPLEBOME: You said you weren't able to open your own school because you didn't speak English. RIO: No, exactly. APPLEBOME: Then you went to school to learn? RIO: I went to evening school. But my brother had to take me, the younger one was fifteen by then, and he come pick me up, because I wasn't allowed to go by myself, you know. It was not too convenient, but he did, my brother, he used to do whatever my mother asked him to do. APPLEBOME: Were you a good English student? RIO: For English, well, I, I was better than the rest in my own way, but I know I wasn't correct, because I can tell, sure. I was better than everyone there. And I jumped, I jumped the fourth, to the five, the six, see, you, you fit in that class, that category, because you know. APPLEBOME: So you regret never having been able to open that school? RIO: No, didn't, no, never did. Right. Never did. Right. APPLEBOME: Do you think you might have been better off if you had stayed and run the school in Sicily? RIO: Well, I couldn't, I couldn't say that. I don't know if I was. I had a bigger name. I had a bigger name all around, they know. Real, real, real was me. APPLEBOME: Okay. Thank you very much. RIO: You're welcome. It was my pleasure to talk to you, although my, excuse my accent. APPLEBOME: Your accent is fine. RIO: My poor, poor English. APPLEBOME: Your English is not poor. RIO: This is the end of side one of tape one of the interview with Angelina Real [Rio]. This is the end of the interview.