APPLEBOME: This is Edward Applebome and I'm speaking with Mr. Mauro Rio on Friday, October 11, 1985. We are beginning this interview at 1:55 in the afternoon. We are about to interview Mr. Mauro about his immigration experience from Italy in 1921. Mr. Rio, can you tell us where and when you were born. RIO: Yes. I was born April 29, 1899. APPLEBOME: And where? RIO: In Priolo, P-R-I-O-L-O, province of Syracuse, Italy. APPLEBOME: Um, and what was life like for you as a boy in Syracuse? RIO: Ah, was very poor, hard to get any job, uh, we had a barber shop, my daddy had a barber shop, it was not enough business for him, so I had to do odd jobs, a farm job, different little jobs, as a boy. And I got to be seventeen years of age, I got drafted in the Italian Army, and after instructions we went to war, and I was wounded twice and, uh, I got discharged, honorable discharge, with a gold medal. The Cruce de Guerro, we call it. And then, I have . . . APPLEBOME: What battles were you wounded in? RIO: In Sonso, as I have the diploma here from the government of Italy, and they give me this gold medal and the title of "cavalieri." ( she laughs ) So, I got discharged, and I get home, and as I said before, the barbershop, I was a barber, and there was no job available, so I. APPLEBOME: Did you live in the village? RIO: Little town, a town, yes. Those days, maybe around five thousand in that place. APPLEBOME: What kind of home was it that you lived in? RIO: ( she laughs ) Just a home, one room. My, uh, mother's and father's bedroom was, curtains all around the bed, you know, the privacy. And I had a little bed along the side of it. And my two sisters also had, my three sisters, one got married, but two remained a little longer, and head, in other words, the whole family in one room. APPLEBOME: Were you sisters older, or younger? RIO: Older than me. I was the youngest in the family. So being, and my father had been in this country from 1907 to 1914, and he came here with a sister of mine, and after my sister got married, in 1914 my daddy came back to the family. APPLEBOME: You had stayed in Italy with your mother? RIO: I was in Italy with my mother and the two sisters, one sister came here with him. APPLEBOME: What did your family do for an income while your father was away? RIO: He would send us a little money, and I had two little jobs, as I said before, maybe my mother goes over and do a little, some kind of a job, to support ourselves. APPLEBOME: Were you able to go to school? RIO: Eh, up to the third grade, those days. That's all, was, in this little town. And I, now, if I may continue about the school, when I get discharged, I stayed in Italy about a year, and a cousin of mine, whom he was a schoolteacher, he prepared me to go to examination, and I got a diploma, eh, that I could go to college. In about three months, four months. But anyway, my father, that had been this country, he said me, "My son," he says, "I know there's no future here for you, and I know what you could do over in g. In Italy you find an open wide spaces, and it's up to individual to get ahead. And for, as much as I, I can't continued, you know, for as much I love you, I think you'd be better, your future would be better over in United States. So I'm gonna write to your sister, and say you want (?) to come to this, to go to United States." "Well," I says, "Daddy," says, "I feel the same way, but my future is my future and I would go." So, finally I came to this country. APPLEBOME: Why had your father come back from the United States? RIO: Why can't come back to Italy? APPLEBOME: Excuse me, right, why did he come back from the United States to Italy? RIO: Because he had the family there, and he was here, just because he had some debts in Italy, and he came here, he made a little money, and he paid the debts, and he came back home, after he paid his debts. APPLEBOME: What kind of work had he done while he was in the United States? RIO: Although he was a barber, he worked in any job he could get, on tin, he was telling me, his hands was all cut up by working in this, uh, tin factory. And then, oh, uh, picking peaches over in New Haven, he was. That's what I remember, he was telling me about. Yeah. APPLEBOME: So you had decided that there was no future to you in Italy? RIO: No, not at all. No, no, no. APPLEBOME: Had any of your friends left? What had you heard about the United States? RIO: When I was there? APPLEBOME: Before you came over, what had you heard about the United States? RIO: What I had heard from my dad, that the United States was much better, easier to find jobs, to find work, than it would be over in Sicily. APPLEBOME: Were other people from your village leaving? RIO: Yes. I came with another friend of mine, two, two of us together. Also a barber. And we worked aboard a ship. ( he laughs ) Ahh. APPLEBOME: Okay. So tell me how you managed to make the trip over. RIO: Yes. Uh, the trip over, uh, was, uh, this friend of mine, we did work, cut hair to the people . . . APPLEBOME: On board the ship? RIO: On board the ship. APPLEBOME: And did you have money to pay for your tickets? RIO: Oh, yes. That my daddy, or my mother had, they sold the little piece of land that they had, to finance my trip over. Oh, yes. And that's the (?), we had a little something, and that's why I am here. Otherwise, I would never have been able to come, you know? APPLEBOME: What did you take with you when you left? RIO: Oh, I took, uh, uh, the clothes that I had, which were very few clothes, and that's about all. And, you know, when I get this country I opened just one valise, you know, suitcase, and the flies waiting there, because there are so many flies over in Sicily, and we closed some of those in there. ( he laughs ) APPLEBOME: So tell me about the boat trip over now. Where did the boat leave from? RIO: From Palermo. APPLEBOME: Did your father take you to get the boat? RIO: No, no. Because, see, we had what you call the expeditionary, the one facilitates this trips, passports and all that. But, he, it finally told us that he had no places to, in, was no vacancy aboard the ships, and he wanted some money under the table to put us in. So this, a friend of mine, we decided, we go by ourselves. We go to Palermo, and we see what we can do. In Palermo, we had a friend, that they was in the service. He was a policeman there. And we got the address of him, and we went over and find him, and he, he help us out, find a place to sleep a few nights, and then we went to go, and we got aboard the ship, from, between ourselves, my friend and I, and we got to this country, yeah. The, um, the voyage was kind of rough, especially three days. And, in order to cut hair, we had to hold one of those posts. I put my left arm around the post, and I work, they would, they, so when I wouldn't shake too much, I wouldn't fall down by the waves over the ship. APPLEBOME: You were cutting the hair of the passengers in. RIO: The passengers in there, and the. APPLEBOME: In steerage or in first or second class? RIO: Third class. Oh, yes. And, uh, some of them, and that's when we were three days, the ship was really rough. And some of them, they couldn't even come to our table, we had a table over ten people who were coming, eating on whatever they gave us to eat on one table. APPLEBOME: Do you remember what the food was? RIO: Oh, mostly Italian foods, macaroni, some meat, yes. Uh, not really, but was much better than the food I ever had over in Italy anyway. ( he laughs ) APPLEBOME: Did you get ill on the voyage over? RIO: No. That's what I was gonna say. Only three of us, from ten, on the table, three of us. So we decided to go and bring the food where other, those people were sitting with us were. Some of them, they wouldn't accept, "No, no, no, I can't eat anything," you know. Anyway, we managed. ( break in tape ) APPLEBOME: You were telling us about bringing the food to the other people from your table? RIO: Yes. OF course, they were so sick they couldn't come to the dining room. APPLEBOME: Did you meet other people on the boat? RIO: Yes. We met some people. Yes. Got the addresses from some girls, but they were never. ( she laughs ) Of course, they were so, other states from, I landed over in Massachusetts, in Connecticut, in New Britain. APPLEBOME: Where were the other people . . . RIO: Oh, from other states, they go to Chicago, some of them and different places. APPLEBOME: No, no, but the people aboard the boat, where were they coming from, were they mostly Italians? RIO: Oh, oh, from Sicily, yes, from Sicily. APPLEBOME: All from Sicily. RIO: Because they board us, mostly from Sicily, in Palermo, they came mostly from Sicily. Yep. APPLEBOME: What were your expectations of what the United States would be like now? RIO: Oh. ( he laughs ) Ah, that I would find a job and I was happy for that. I want to work. Let's see, uh, and the, uh, but I didn't know about the climate. I had never seen the snow in my life, with the exception of one time or a few times while I was in the service. But over in Sicily I had never seen the snow. But I came over here in January, and there was about a foot of snow. I says, "What's this stuff here? How we're gonna go through?" You know. But we managed, you get to the train, and lead me to my cousin that came over to pick me up. APPLEBOME: Okay. We'll get to that in a second. RIO: Yes. APPLEBOME: When you left, what did your mother or your sisters have to say? RIO: That's another sad moment also, because they all came to the depot station, railroad station, down from Priola, I'm gonna go to Palmermo, on a train, you know. And, of course, over there they take and they wave the handkerchief out and wave as we go along, but I saw that my two sisters get a hold of my mother, she fainted. And I, I still have that, on me, you know. ( he is moved ) I'm sorry. I get moved when I say those, you know. APPLEBOME: That's okay. That's understandable. RIO: So, now I'm Palermo, as I think I said before, found this friend of ours, and he facilitated the things for us, and we got aboard the ship, and we got to this country. APPLEBOME: What were your expectations of what the United States would be like now? RIO: Oh . . . ( he laughs ) Ah, that I would find a job, and I was happy for that. I want to work. Let' see, uh, and the, uh, but I didn't know about the climate. I had never seen the snow in my life, with the exception of one time or a few times while I was in the service. But over in Sicily I had never seen the snow. But I came over here in January, and there was about a foot of snow. I says, "What's this stuff here? How we're gonna go through?" You know? But we managed, you get to the train, and lead me to my cousin that came over to pick me up. APPLEBOME: Okay. We'll get to that in a second. RIO: Yes. APPLEBOME: When you left, what did your mother or your sisters have to say? RIO: That's another sad moment also, because they all came to the depot station, railroad station, down from Priola. I'm gonna go to Palermo, on a train, you know. And, of course, over there they take and they wave the handkerchief out and wave as we go along, but I saw that my two sisters get a hold of my mother, she fainted. And I, I still have that on me, you know. ( he is moved ) I'm sorry, I get moved when I say those, you know. APPLEBOME: That's okay. That's understandable. RIO: So, now I'm Palermo, as I think I said before, found this friend of ours, and he facilitated the things for us, and we got aboard the ship, and we got to this country. APPLEBOME: When the boat first got into New York Harbor, what were your impressions? RIO: Impressions that I, uh, was, I had very good impressions in United States because as many other people, as they has, had been in this country, also this cousin of mine that came over on the ship to see me, had been in this country. And, uh, uh, how good it was, how nice it was. Free, not be subjected to, uh, abuses, you know, uh, you will have respect, the people will respect you, and you will have freedom of speech, you know, those things? APPLEBOME: Did you not have freedom of speech in Sicily? RIO: Not, just before I left the Mussolini was about to get over, and you had to be careful what you would say. Matter of fact, if I waited two more months, he wouldn't, he stopped the immigration. I would never have been able to come over, you know, after the First World War. Mussolini took over there, and the people began to have control, and they must agree on certain things, you know. APPLEBOME: Were there other ways in which people abused you or your family? RIO: Uh, no, no. Not on my family, no. APPLEBOME: When you got to New York, did you see the Statue of Liberty? RIO: Oh, yes, indeed. Oh, I was so happy. ( he laughs ) Huge, big thing, and I had read something about it, you know, that the France donated and all that. Yep. ( he laughs ) APPLEBOME: Were you out on the deck to see it? RIO: Oh, yes, indeed. And it was a good weather, nice and sunny, although it was cold. And, uh, while we were on the deck, we had these people with the little boats, under the ship there, going around to find out their friends. And my cousin was aboard this little boat, he finally saw me, because he knew me and I knew him, and we wave each other, and that's it, you know. And, uh, if I may continue now about my cousin, and he come over, and left his wife, who was pregnant, and she got a baby while the husband was picking me up. And when we get there to, to his house, that's where I went, when my sister, they lived together in New Britain, we find a newborn baby. ( he laughs ) APPLEBOME: Let's talk about, though, when you landed on Ellis Island, what was the examination like? RIO: The examination, not too much of an examination. They told us that they would have to wait until it was the proper time for us to come out. They had some, uh, problems or something. And we were there waiting from one day to another, and I think we were there for three full days, and the fourth day we were allowed to go out. APPLEBOME: There was a quarantine? RIO: A quarantine, yes. That's what they call it, yes. APPLEBOME: So what did you do for those three or four days that you were on Ellis Island? RIO: Just, uh, killed time the best we could. Nothing else to do, you know. Uh, make, try to make friends, try to talk to people, and that's about it. APPLEBOME: Where were the other people from who were waiting there? RIO: As I said, from Sicily, and they, they're from the provinces, you know. APPLEBOME: There weren't other boats that had dropped people off during those days? RIO: Other boats? APPLEBOME: Boats from other countries? RIO: Oh, not that I know of, no, no, no. APPLEBOME: What did you do for food on those days? RIO: They, they fed, they fed us. Yes. They fed us. APPLEBOME: Do you remember what the meals were? RIO: Umm, soups, ahh, hamburgers, I guess. Yes. APPLEBOME: Did you pay for the food? RIO: No, no. I don't think so. I don't remember I did. No, I guess not. APPLEBOME: Were you worried about being sent back? RIO: Oh, yes. I didn't know what was going to happen, why this delay, you know, what this quarantine? I didn't, we were healthy, you know, I was healthy. But they had to do it and we obeyed. What can you do? APPLEBOME: What were some of the questions they asked you? RIO: None. None, about sickness, no, not that I remember. Uh . . . APPLEBOME: Did they speak to you in Italian? RIO: That's all I knew. I didn't know the English, yes. APPLEBOME: And what did your cousin do while you were being held there those days? RIO: He had to wait, and wait outside for me, until I would come out. He would come over and ask questions and whatever he did go, and they told that we may come the next day, whatever. And they told him when we would come out, and they waited. APPLEBOME: He waited on Ellis Island? RIO: I, no. I think in New York, because he came with the little boat over. I think it's, uh, over in New York. I guess so. APPLEBOME: And where did you sleep during those days? RIO: While we were on Ellis Island? This big, huge, big room they had for us there. And I remember undressing. No, I never did undress, I don't think, as far as I can remember, I guess not. No. APPLEBOME: Did you sleep on benches, or on the floor? RIO: On the floor, yes. You know, some blankets, it was cold, you know. APPLEBOME: What, could you see across to New York Harbor? RIO: Yes, I think so, yes. On a clear day I think it was, oh, huge, big buildings there, you know? Tall buildings. I had never seen it before. APPLEBOME: And what did you think about that? RIO: Oh, it's great. Oh, sure, wonderful. I want to get there as soon as I can. ( he laughs ) APPLEBOME: Did you have money that you needed to show them on Ellis Island? RIO: No, I didn't have to show them, but I had a little money left, yes, for the train tickets. APPLEBOME: And I suppose you had made money giving the haircuts. RIO: I made fifty dollars. No, fifty, fifty liras, yes. Yeah. Fifty liras. And fifty for my partner, my friend. We made a hundred dollars, both of us. Oh, a hundred liras. APPLEBOME: How much was a hundred lira worth at the time? RIO: About the same as the United States money. Five liras to a dollar, which is a hundred pennies, five liras, twenty pennies for a lira, twenty cents for a lira. Five liras to one dollar, oh, yeah, about even. APPLEBOME: So you had made a nice bit of money on the trip? RIO: Oh, yes. That's why I saw fifty dollars. That's what we got, fifty dollars. APPLEBOME: Where did you go after you got off of Ellis Island? RIO: We went over where my sister and my brother-in-law were, and living together with my cousin, my first cousin and his wife, was different apartments, the same building. They had a business together, they had a restaurant together, and a pool room. And the first job they gave me is to set those balls on the pool table, and so I would do some kind of work, and I, I help out in the kitchen, washing dishes or whatever I could, anything they tell me, I was, and finally, finally, I tried to get a job as a barber, now knowing the language, the English language, no one would give me a job because since so many customers come in, they, uh, tell you that they want some kind of work, and you don't understand, they says I can't hire you. Finally, after about two months that I was in this country a Jewish gentleman, he had a barber shop, but he knew how to speak Sicilian, this Jewish gentleman. APPLEBOME: And this is where? RIO: Over in Hartford. From New Britain they moved to Hartford, and in Hartford, Main Street, this gentleman had a barbershop, three chairs barbershop, he says, "Yes," in Sicilian, he told me, "Yes. You'll be sitting next to me, if somebody come. I'll ask him the way he wants the haircut done, and then I'll tell you in Italian." And he was so pleased that I do that, the kind of work that I was doing. I was twenty-one years of age then, and I could do pretty good work, you know. And he kept me, and he says, "But I can't give you full wages, union wages, to you." And says, "The union wages are fifteen dollars a week." Those days. He says, "I think you'd be satisfied, I hope you'll be satisfied with the ten dollars per week." I says, "Sure, anything, as long as I get a little money." So he gave me ten dollars per week. After five weeks he give me the full wages, fifteen dollars. And then I was so happy. I could send some money over to Italy, my parents. APPLEBOME: Were you living in Hartford then? RIO: Yes. And I . . . APPLEBOME: Where did you live? RIO: In the, uh, Temple Place, in Hartford. Near . . . APPLEBOME: With who? RIO: . . . almost the corner of Front Street and Temple Place. And . . . APPLEBOME: Who did you live with? RIO: I lived with my, uh, sister. They moved from New Britain, they moved, the business didn't go too well, and they moved to Hartford, and I went with them. And I got a job there in Hartford. And I paid room and board, seven dollars, a dollar a day. ( he laughs ) And the rest I sent over to Italy. APPLEBOME: How did it compare with your expectations of what it would be like? RIO: Better than I thought. Of course, it was so hard, that I couldn't talk to nobody. I didn't know the language. That was really hard. But I went to night schools, I wanted to learn as best I could so I could do better work, satisfy the customers better. And I, uh, I was, and many times, uh, the evening school would start at seven o'clock in the evening, and the barber shop would close at seven o'clock. I says, "Can I get out about fifteen minutes earlier so I could get to school in time?" "Well," they says, "maybe customers would be waiting." "Oh," I said, "I give up the half day work that you give me, if you allowed me fifteen minutes for three nights per week so I could . . ." Oh, says, "Okay, okay." ( he laughs ) He saw I was so anxious, you know, and he let me go. APPLEBOME: And then you were able to learn English. RIO: Yes, oh, yes. Oh, after, after a couple of years I was pretty good, I could understand anything they tell about the trade, mostly about the trade, you know. APPLEBOME: What was different from what you had, sounds like a lot was different, but what were some of the customs that were different from what you've seen before? RIO: Customs, dressing were different. They dressed different, and the food was different, ah, everything was different, really. Eh, but, I had no occasion to find out more because I don't, I wouldn't go nowhere, because I couldn't speak English, you know. I was confined with the Italian people, with my sister and my cousin and some friends we had near there. APPLEBOME: Did you start dressing like an American? RIO: Not until I could afford to buy. ( he laughs ) Oh, the first suit I think I bought after about three years that I was in this country. APPLEBOME: What did you wear before that, what kind of clothes? RIO: Well, I had, what I had, the, uh, not, pretty good, because when I got discharged from the service, the Italian government, they gave us, uh, clothing, for suit clothing. And free, you know. Either that, or fifty liras. So I took the fifty liras, and I bought a suit before I came to this country. So I had that suit there, and I wear it all the time. APPLEBOME: And the communication that you continued to have with your family back in Italy? RIO: Oh, yes, definitely, sure. My parents, and my, some of my friends, some of my friends, for a while, we keep correspondence. APPLEBOME: This is the end of side one of tape one of the interview with Mr. Mauro Rio. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO APPLEBOME: This is side two of tape one of the interview with Mr. Mauro. Mr. Mauro, you said that it was even better than you had expected in the United States. What were some of the things that were even better? RIO: Better, because I found a job, the first thing that I was looking for, and there was a, ree schooling, the food was better, you know? APPLEBOME: What kind of food did you eat? RIO: Of course, the beginning, I ate, like, spaghetti, you know, but then I get to like the American food, yes. APPLEBOME: What were some of the foods you had never tasted before? RIO: Uh, New England boiled dinners, and those beautiful steaks, yes, sizzling steaks. I never had real steaks over in Italy. Could never afford to buy them. We had a chicken once in a while. In order to get the, uh, eggs, you had to be sick. ( he laughs ) So we had eggs here in the morning, for breakfast. APPLEBOME: What were some of the foods from Sicily that you were glad to not have to eat any more? RIO: Rice and beans. ( he laughs ) APPLEBOME: What were some other things that you saw here that you had never seen before? RIO: Uh, automobiles. Uh, more, those, uh, traffic, system they had . . . APPLEBOME: What about streetcars? RIO: Streetcars, yes, we never saw, had over in Preola, we never had transportation of any kind, you know? And streetcars, open cars, I used to enjoy to travel in open cars, you know, streetcars. APPLEBOME: This is in Hartford. RIO: In Hartford, yes. And, uh, everything was just beautiful. APPLEBOME: And you continued to stay in touch with your family? Did anybody else ever come over? RIO: No. No one else than my family, no. Uh, not, no. APPLEBOME: Did you see your father and mother again? RIO: Never did again, no. I was here maybe fifteen years, my father died, and, well, three or four years later my mother died, both of them at the age of eighty- five. APPLEBOME: But you wrote to them? RIO: Oh, yes, indeed. APPLEBOME: They were able to read? RIO: Not lately. Lately, my father had an operation, the cataracts, both eyes, and, of course, he couldn't see too well, but after the operation he couldn't see at all. They went bad. And they couldn't read. But my sister read the letters to him. APPLEBOME: And you would send money? RIO: Oh, yes. All I could. All I could. I only keep one dollar for myself, and then the tips that i used to have, sending money to over there, because they sold that the little thing they had, the little land, you know. And I want to give it back to them. Oh, yes. And I over, overpaid, I'm glad. Until, until I was married, God bless my wife, so, and she never complained. But we began to have children, I still, I sent money over to Italy every once in a while. Sure. APPLEBOME: Okay, thank you very much. RIO: Oh, yes. You're welcome.