NASH: Today is February 1, 1974, and I am speaking with Mrs. Edith Ryan who came to the United States from England in the year 1921 at the age of twenty six. Today we're sitting in the Katherine Ingle Center, which Mrs. Ryan is a member of, and it is a center for senior citizens and they have all kinds of activities and that is how I had the pleasure of meeting Mrs. Ryan. Mrs. Ryan, where were you born? RYAN: In London, England. NASH: And what were the kinds of circumstances that led up to your coming to the United States? RYAN: Well, during the First World War, you know, those days you could talk to anybody in uniform and you felt it was being pretty good to do that and two other girls besides myself, we left work, and on the way home we passed three American soldiers looking up at the sky. I said, "What are you looking up for, zeppelins," and then that got us together. So we, you know--what is that word I want, when you get together--anyway, I didn't get the man I wanted, so I fell in love with the soldier with my other friend, you see, so I said to her, "Gee, I like him better than mine." So luckily she had a boyfriend and the boyfriend was jealous and put a stop to her, you know, association with him, so I got him in the end, and I did have him until he died. So then we got married and had two children. One was three and a half and one was six weeks when my husband said he had to go back to the States. He said, " This is a God forsaken hole." He called England a God forsaken hole. Wasn't that awful? Anyway, I was used to it. But now that I have come to America and I know what he meant. So he had to come first because I wanted the second baby to be born in England. So he came first because he wanted the second baby to be born in England. I made a mistake there. The other one wasn't born yet. So I said I wanted it to be born in England. So he came first and after the baby was six weeks old we came over here. And it impressed me very much. Of course, you know, in those days you didn't have radio or television and you were too busy or didn't want to bother to read the papers, so I didn't know much about it, you see. So the first thing that impressed me was all the fruit, plentiful, plentiful! And when I was pregnant with the last baby, I had cravings for grapes, and my husband was so good he walked all over London to get, oh, it was awful, it took him an hour and he didn't get it anyway. So no wonder he said it was a God forsaken hole. NASH: Let's go to the arrangements that you had to make to come to the United States. Now your husband was an American citizen, that's right? RYAN: Yes. NASH: Okay, what did you have to do to come here? RYAN: Well, I didn't do anything. See, the American Red Cross took care of it, so therefore I had nothing to do about it but pack up and come, and because it was quite a performance, you know, coming here for good, so anyway, we got to Southhampton. It was very hard having a young baby. By the way, in the train from London to Southhampton they were serving tea and there was I with a little child beside me and a baby on me lap and I was so helpless, I thought, dying for a cup of tea. How can I have a cup of tea, what can I do with the baby? So somebody was very good, she said, "I'll hold the baby," and I was so pleased. So on the boat we got and I was scared to death. I'm scared to death of water now, but love conquers all. I had to get over there. So it was very nice on the ship. But then getting off was the rather bad part. First of all, in those days we went to Ellis Island. So it turns out that the doctor goes and examines everybody and then if the majority are dirty, we have to go to Ellis Island to be fumigated. The steward rather liked me. He used to look after the baby while I was having my meals and he told me what was going on. He said, "But I will take care of you. You won't have to go through the fumigation." So I can't remember how he did it, but the sad part was that after it was all over, I forgot my shoes. I said, "Where are my shoes, where are my shoes." and the poor steward had to go and look for my shoes. Well, he found them. And also while he was hiding us--this is not right, is it, to tell you he did that--but anyway, while he was hiding us, my little girl three and a half started crying, "keep her quiet, keep her quiet," so anyway we kept her quiet. So that was the first story. And then when I got off the ship, a doctor, I think it was a doctor. No, no, Immigration Agent. He started talking to me in German. I looked at him. "You are German, aren't you?" I said, "No, I am English." By the way, do you mind if I go back to an incident in England? While the war was on, of course, the Germans were, you know, nobody would hire a German. So my brother went after a job--he was a lady's tailor. They wouldn't give him a job. They said, "We don't take Germans." He said, "I'm not German." "Oh, yes you are." Isn't that funny? And nobody knows of any German background in my family. Nobody knows about it. So, anyway, then when I got, oh, I forgot to tell you. I got a letter from my husband, I think he tried to get rid of me, he said, "Don't come, I have to go away." So my brother said, "If you don't go now, you will never go." So anyway, I called the Red Cross and they took me over. So I thought he wasn't going to be there. The Red Cross said they would take care of me until he came back from where he was going. Anyway, when I got there, there was no Red Cross to meet me, nobody to meet me. Oh, and I was so upset. So they said, "We will have to send you back." "Oh," I said, "You can't." I said, "My mother will have a fit. She was so glad to get rid of me." She was, because there I moved in with her and two babies. You know, it was no picnic for her. I said, "I can't go back." So anyway, thank goodness he was there and it was wonderful. But it is the surprise I got in this country. Nothing like I thought it was in any way, shape or form. First of all, in England I was there twenty six years, I only saw two colored people in my whole life. One was a nanny, nursed babies, and the other one was just walking in Piccadilly, and I was so surprised I turned around and stared. I had a boyfriend and he was mad. He thought I was making eyes at him. Making eyes at him, I didn't know what he was. But anyway, that impressed me when I saw the colored people. I thought they were rather cute, especially babies' little hands. And what else happened? NASH: Well, let's go back to when you got off the ship. Just why do you think they spoke to you in German? RYAN: Because I looked German evidentally. See, that is the only reason I can think of. NASH: Were they trying to find out something? Did they think you... RYAN: Oh, no. As we got off the ship this agent was standing there and most probably by my face he thought I was German and goodness knows what he was going to ask me. I forgot now if he ever asked anything. NASH: Did you go to Ellis Island? RYAN: Oh, yes, we went to Ellis Island and it was awful there. It was awful. I can't tell you how awful. We read about it. There was a magazine in England called "Jung Bowl Magazine," and it wrote an article about Ellis Island, how terrible it was and how you were treated. Treated like cattle, you know. And then the different languages. My little girl was sitting in the middle of a mattress. See, you had to get your own mattress. You had to sleep on the mattress. And she was sitting in the middle of the mattress looking very tired, and somebody came speaking a foreign language, Spanish or Italian, and snatched the mattress from under her and the poor kid went rolling over, you know. Everybody was upset, see, so nobody seemed to be kind to each other. And I noticed that very few English came over here. NASH: Why do you think that is? RYAN: I wonder. Because they love England, I guess, and think they are doing alright over there. But I would never have come if--but I am not sorry I did. I'm glad I missed the last war. Then I felt guilty in missing that when my mother and my father were--oh, the last war was much worst than the first. So I was glad I missed that. And then I was surprised how far advanced you were to England. England seems to get things about three years after America had them. All the amount of food and the apartments and the, like even the iceboxes and things like that, ice boxes then I thought were so wonderful. Of course, we didn't need them in England ever. My sister still doesn't have a refrigerator and ice box. So a trend of the weather. Oh yes, over in England if the temperature is seventy six, they say they have a heat wave. "Oh, we have a heat wave, heat wave." Oh, and another thing about it, when I first came over, in England you were so glad for a sunshiny day, you would take the children for a walk in the park and let them lie in the sun. So I thought I would take the children to the park. Oh, I didn't realize the heat. I came back and collapsed on the bed, collapsed absolutely. I could hear my husband talking to somebody, but I couldn't pull myself together. It was the heat, you see. Oh, the language surprised me. And the fact that nobody understood me surprised me. I went into a grocery shop and I said, "Half a pound of butter, please." He said, "Huh?" I said, "Half a pound of butter, please." "Huh?" And a voice from the other end of the counter said, "Give the lady a half an burrer." It was very funny. And a lot of things happened like that, you know. And, also in England, things have different meanings from what they are here, and the first time I went to a rooming house and there was like a superintendent, and she was awfully nice. She was very nice. So one day I said to her, I said, "You are so homely." She said, "Huh, first time anybody has called me that to my face." And I couldn't understand it so I told my husband when he came home and he said, "Well, homely means ugly of face." In England, it means you are motherly and kind and warm. Wasn't that awful? And in fact, my husband shocked me a couple of times saying things. Like one night we were out and he said, "I don't feel good tonight." I thought, oh my word, he doesn't feel good. What am I going to do? You know, I, I don't feel good. I thought he meant something else, but he meant he didn't feel well. And I was thinking, I did. So anyway, I didn't say anything. So another time I was out and he said, "I feel sick." So I thought, oh my God. We were on Oxford Street, you know, a nice place to be, and I thought, he can't be sick in the gutter. What am I going to do with him. He still meant he didn't feel well. So you see, the Americans say "I'm sick" or "I don't feel good", but in England, we only say "I'm sick" if you really need a bucket, you know. So there is a rather interesting, really amusing things happened. NASH: How did people react to the fact that you were English? RYAN: Over here? NASH: Yes. RYAN: Oh, don't mention that. You know, the person next door, I didn't know her even, but I put the baby in the front garden, we say it is garden, but it was just something, you know, and the woman next door said to me, "How is your friend?" I said, "I have no friends. I only just come over. I have been over here six weeks." She said, "I mean Queen Mary. If I had her hair, I would tear every hair out of her head." I thought, my poor Queen, what she wants to do to her, you know, and I was surprised at that. I never heard that in England. We have a lot of Irish in England. She was Irish, by the way. We have a lot of Irish in England and nobody ever spoke like that. People are different here. NASH: In what ways are they different? RYAN: Oh, in a lot of ways. Well, first of all, when I felt they were very hospitable, that is one thing. Now in England, unless you went at tea time you wouldn't get anything. But here if you went at eleven o'clock in the morning or two in the afternoon, on would go the coffee and cake, you know. I did notice that. They are more generous. I can see the point too, England was in too much of a bad state to be able to afford being generous. No, it was only the Irish that had something to say about the English. Oh, and another thing about this country. If I had been born in this country, I would be a famous actress like Gracie Fields. I am a second Gracie Fields, they say. But in this country, you get opportunities. In England you don't. Anyway, I was satisfied by my daughter when she was five years old. She was on the stage singing, dancing and telling stories. When she was seven years of age, she had three radio programs a week. People about my age would remember them or a little younger. And then she was starred in many shows and I have America to thank for that. It would never happen in England. NASH: What was the name of the radio program? RYAN: The first you wouldn't know because it was a Litman program. Litman sponsored it. And I forget the names of the other two. But when she was seven years old, this was in, she got "Let's Pretend it was Cold," and it was on for about twenty years and she was always the princess. She is lovely in a princess. And then they auditioned for "Claudia." They auditioned all over the place. They interviewed two hundred fifty well-known actresses for the part of Claudia, and my daughter got the part of "Claudia." And she would have been a big star by now. But Rose Franklin, who wrote "Claudia" became sick and she had to cut out the radio, the stage or writing her book. See, she had three things going. And she cut out radio. So, therefore, you are high when you are high, but she down she went. She still carried on and she had a screen test, but they said they wanted to operate on her nose and she wouldn't have that. She had a little pug nose, you know. They wanted to put a little bit on maybe. But I think Americans are very lucky, very lucky. They don't realize what England went through. And I will never regret coming, never. But I was twenty eight years before I went back to see my mother because of lack of money. And then she always wanted to live her life with my brother, her son, but he died. And when I got the news he died, I said, "My mother wants me." And my husband was very good. He got me away right away because I thought, "I don't know how she will live without him." So that was when I went over. And she was so surprised. So anyway, she looked as though she was going to collapse. But after being in two or three minutes, my sister came and we saw her through the window. So my mother said, "Hide, hide, I'll surprise her." So she came in and she told her, "There is somebody to see you in the sitting room." So when she came in, I said, "Could you please help the poor, starving Americans?" She looked as though she was going to collapse. I said that for fun, you know. Poor, starving Americans, that was for a joke. But she looked terrible, she was so shocked. But we all had a cup of tea and everything was alright. In England, everything is alright if you have a cup of tea. During the war, you will never believe it, people got under the bed, anywhere to get away from the bombs, but I was pregnant and couldn't get under the bed, and my mother was too fat to get under the bed. So anyway, so I thought, "Well, I'm not getting under the bed, so I won't be much safer in the corner," so I went and made tea for everybody and they (?) tea. Oh, it was terrible about the war. But I think the English have a good sense of humor. People think they haven't. They say if you tell them a joke Saturday, they laugh in church on Sunday. That is not true. They have a great sense of humor. So anyway, then I had two other children. I had two miscarriages and two children died of neglect, but I won't mention that, in the hospitals. NASH: How did England look to you when you went back there for the first time? RYAN: Oh, it looked good, jolly good. Oh, yes, I forgot to tell you this. I am glad you mentioned that. That is another thing that got me crazy, the traffic, going the wrong way. I cried. I would just stand there and cry because I have the baby in the carriage and a little toddler walking beside me, and I would stand and couldn't cross the street because no lights then, no lights, you see. And it was only because the traffic was going the wrong way. But when I went back to England, I got reprimanded for looking the wrong way then. I was crossing the street and all the horns were blowing and I thought, "What are all the horns blowing for?" And it happens that I was looking the wrong way, the right way for England. So that was rather funny, I thought. But it was very frightening though. Very frightening. NASH: How did people react to the fact that you had been, had you become an American citizen? RYAN: Oh, not by that time. I never did. I wouldn't mind. I mean it didn't make any difference to me much. NASH: Can I ask you why you never became a citizen? RYAN: No. It is too much of a long story. NASH: Okay. RYAN: Never mind. I am just as good as a citizen. I do my bit and , you know, I help hither and thither. By the way, I volunteered to go in the hospitals and spend a lot of time in hospitals around the country, or the city at least. I entertain, Gracie Fields, I sing, "Walter, Lead Me to the Alter," and they love that, you know. So I do all I can. A piece of paper doesn't mean anything. I could be a better citizen than those that are citizens. NASH: Do you maintain any contacts with England? RYAN: Oh, yes. I haven't found any friends. I mean there is too much of a gap between the time I left school and by that time, but I just went and saw my old relatives. NASH: Just recently, you went to England? RYAN: Well, about five years ago. Who died five years ago? Ah, yes, my sister lost her husband and she sent a cable. She said, "George only has ten days to live." So they wouldn't let me go right away so I had to call Washington and have a big do in this country, but they let me go and I am glad I went because she would have never done without me. You know, I took care of everything and it was great comfort to her. Death is a terrible thing really when it happens. Especially when you are old. That is the point. There are so many people living alone. Their husbands go first. I think the women put them in their graves, and they go first and leave the poor women all alone. It is terrible. But I happen to have a brother-in-law that, you know, rents a small room and he is company as far as I can see, today. NASH: Well, is there anything else you would like to say about the experience of having come to this country so many years ago? Do you feel English or American by now? RYAN: Oh, I am afraid I still feel English. I don't care what you say, an American would feel the same way I am sure if they went to live in England. Of course, I am sorry to say the Americans gave America a bad name during the war. See these soldiers that went over? They had plenty of money and they would throw their money about showing off. Do you mind me saying this about the Americans? NASH: No. RYAN: Because my daughter, my niece, she had great experiences in Litchfield works here. They would break the place up, you know, spend a lot, throw their money around, but in the end, just break them up. And the shopkeepers were afraid to have them in there. They used the bars, of course. They rather bragged and showed off, which naturally the English wouldn't like, really. As I said, "My husband said, "God forsaken hole." Well, little did we realize we had been through the mill. America hasn't been through any mill. In fact, I am reading a book. It is called "Winds of War," and it is bringing back how the Americans did feel and how great the British were to hold up. Somebody wrote a book the other day and he mentioned it on the air and it said, "America didn't win the war, the British carried on and they won the war." you know, but the Americans upset people that's where they got a bad name, you see. They upset people by saying, "we had to come and win the war." They were very foolish to do that. Now what be like to throw the family out. NASH: Well, I have enjoyed talking with you very much. RYAN: Well, I didn't say anything about the Katherine Ingle Center, did I? NASH: Would you like to say something about the Katherine Ingle Center? RYAN: Oh, I would. I must say that the Katherine Ingle Center has saved my sanity. I have been a member here fifteen years and I can't speak too highly of it. And they had a, what I belonged to was the singing group, the instrumental group, drama group. I am interested in wonderful discussions, we have wonderful discussions, and the birthday party once a year. NASH: Do they celebrate your birthday party here? RYAN: Every month I mean they celebrate it. Yes, sure. Every month they celebrate somebody's birthday. And I was sick on my last birthday. On your birthday, you can do what you like. You know, sing or dance or say anything. And I was so sorry I was in the hospital my last birthday. I am going to try and get on next month because I enjoy entertaining. See, I wanted to be an actress, but my mother said, wait I've got to think. Oh, yes, said it is a rocky road to ruin. By the way, excuse my memory, but don't forget I am not a child and I can't think. She said the rocky road to ruin. Well, I didn't want to be ruined. I was only fifteen, but now I don't mind. But America is the place to come to get on in the world. It is wonderful. I thank America for looking after me while I am here. But another good thing about England, the medicare situation, everybody is under it. My daughter came over here with two children and it was awful to have to pay so much money for doctors, for eyes and the teeth, where in England you get everything. So I really would like to have Medicare