ALLEE: This is Interview Number 175, this is Debra Allee, I'm speaking with Mr. Lazarus Salamon, on Thursday, May 29th, 1986. We're beginning the interview at 1:15 PM and we're about to interview Mr. Salamon about his immigration experience from Hungary, the part that is now Roumania, in 1920. SALAMON: Okay, I did not have a norma childhood because there was a war, a never ending war. That's all I knew of, the scarcity of food, the scarcity of materials, we had to fight for a piece of bread, hide it because it was taken away from you. That was the end of the War, they even took your linens, your bedlinens, you had to hide it, and the soldiers were foraging for food, that's how bad it got. So, and i never knew of a lot of fruits and vegetables that I see here. I never knew such a thing as bananas, oranges, chocolate, coffee. It didn't hurt me healthwise because I drank raw food, I drank milk, I ate fresh vegetables in the summer. In the winter, of course, it was only beans, dried food, and we could hardly wait for the spring to come so we could have some fresh food. So, when I left, I just came with my shirt on my back. ALLEE: You were talking earlier, would you tell us what life was like there and why you wanted to leave or why you had to leave. SALAMON: Well, first of all, Roumanians came in as an army of occupation to, uh, they said they're coming to make order but then they stayed. Hungary became one third of its size and Roumania became triple its size, and all neighboring countries chopped pieces away from Hungary, new countries emerged. As you know, Czechoslovakia was a new country, Serbia became Yugoslavia, the Croatians were part of Hungary. Incidentally, they are the ones that were terrorists here up until two years ago, but now they are put into jail, the bombing at LaGuardia Airport are the same people. Poland was a new country, independent from Russia, so was Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, they all became independent countries. When the Roumanians came in, they were anxious to get rid of the minorities. They had a big section of Hungarian population which they couldn't get rid of, after all Hungary would object. The Germans they couldn't start in with but the Jews had nobody who would stick up for them. When the Roumanians came in, they made Jews turn in their precious stones, silver coins, of which my father had a big amount, he was a well-to-do man, and he had a beautiful home. And not only did they take it away from him but they beat him up mercilessly. And the soldier that beat him up didn't have the heart to hit him hard and the officer hollered, "Hit him hard," and when they took him away, before they took him away, he came over to us children. "Let me bless you." We never knew if he was going to come back because over there, they took you away and you disappeared. So when he came over to say, to bless us, my mother collapsed and died. So we decided, enough is enough. So, incidentally, after Hitler came in, I have a book full of pictures. None of them survived. The only ones I found after 51 years there were mixed marriages. The others, remaining ones all went to Israel. The only thing I found there is a cemetery surrounded by a concrete fence with a watchtower. A two-story little building. In it lived a Hungarian with the two most beautiful girls, the Gabor sisters could hide themselves , and living in the woods. The Jewish cemetery was on top of the hill, and they had red cheeks like dolls, you know, al that oxygen. Transylvania is a scenic country, like the Catskill Mountains but they have high mountains with snow, practically all year round. ALLEE: And that's where you're from, Transylvania section? SALAMON: Yeah, and I was born in a town, I have a stamp with a cancellation on it of my home-town. About eight miles away was the town where Dracula was born. ALLEE: hat was the name of your town? SALAMON: Medias, M-E-D-I-A-S, and the town where Dracula was born was Sigshoara, S-I-G-S-H-O-A-R-A, this is the Roumanian pronunciation. He was born there but he didn't rule from that town. These towns were fortresses. Transylvania was never overrun by Atilla the Hun, it was never overrun by the Tartars, because it's surrounded by high mountains. Even the Russians lost the war trying to break through the Carpathian Mountains. It's in a semi-circle, it's surrounded by, the high mountains are in semi-circle, protecting Transylvania. ALLEE: So you lived with your family until the Roumanians came in? SALAMON: Yes. ALLEE: So, after they came in and beat up your father, and your mother died-- SALAMON: We decided to leave. So, when we came, of course, you couldn't come through Germany, it was closed off. So, to reach the Port of Antwerp in Belgium, you had to go through the underbelly of Europe. And it was a trip of five weeks, and a young boy like me, it was very strange to be days and days on the train. ALLEE: Did you go with your family, or by yourself? SALAMON: No, just my brother and one of my sisters, but we dispersed here, we were all on our own. It was hard for a fellow my age to fend for myself. I missed my parents at the time. Don't forget I lived nine years in rooming houses. ALLEE: Okay, you showed me all the documents, can you tell us about what you had to go through to get all your papers to be able to leave? SALAMON: You needed an affidavit from somebody here, who will watch for you, then-- ALLEE: The affidavit was a distant relative of yours? SALAMON: Yes, who left on account of his business record, which is a stigma for life. If you go bankrupt, they got better laws here. They used to put you here in jail too, 200 years ago if you are indebted, if you couldn't pay your debts. After I had the affidavit, you needed good behavior from the city, then you go for your passport, which we had no trouble getting. We bought our steamship tickets from an agency. There was an avalanche of emigration from all over Europe and primarily Jews, in those days. Because I noticed, as we came closer to port, I saw masses and masses of people from East Europe, from the Baltics. I also noticed the girls had short cropped hair, there was a typhoid epidemic in Russia, and they looked like boys. We, after we got our passports, I had to go from Transylvania, at least five, six hundred miles east, back to the capitol of Roumania, and the travel agent hired a car on the train, must of made arrangement with the station-master, and we were all put in one car, and at that time the railroads didn't have a glass, a pane in their windows, that's how bad it was. There wasn't a single pane in any car, unbelievable. And it was November when it starts to get cold, especially when you travel over the Carpathian Mountains. In those days, a locomotive used to pull the train, and another locomotive used to push the train over the mountains to Roumania. And there in the capitol of Roumania I found a lot of Russian Jews. They came, Russia did not let out any people, but they went over the border into Roumania, and Roumania is a corrupt country. For money you could buy anything from the King down. So, they came with Roumanian passports, but they were from Russia. I also noticed on the train there was a boy, a fellow about 20 years old, they entrusted him with five orphans, they were all girls, from eight to 14, I would say. They came probably to relatives. Because I remember a little girl, about nine or ten years old cried she left the graves behind. Don't forget these children that grew up in these abnormal times, they were not like children, they were serious. You see, even during the War, they used to load, the War was close to our city, they used to load these bombs, they looked like pineapples with a lever-- ALLEE: Like a grenade? SALAMON: A grenade, yes, and they used to chase us away. One of my school mates told me, "I cracked one," he thought, we didn't know what it was. He pulled the lever, he was blown apart. And my father came running to see if his child is alive. Those were the conditions. There were children that lost fingers, and I saw soldiers when they asked me, "How far is the battlefield?" When I told them how many miles, I saw young soldiers crying, some of them were praying, it was pitiful. So, we got on the train and it was a long trip. All we took with us was a little jam, bread, and sardines, but you can't live on sardines, day in and day out. I already started to get fainting spells. When we reached the border between Yugoslavia and Roumania, we crossed the bridge-- This is a very interesting section. It used to be the border of three countries, Hungary, Roumania, Serbia. Then it became the border of two countries only, Roumania and Yugoslavia, and this is by the Danube. And across the Danube there was still a bridge with a sign, that the Romans built two thousand years ago, with the sign, "Hadrian," like if you could still read it. The Danube crosses the Carpathian Mountains from about a one and a half mile width to about 225 foot width, very deep. There was an Island there, Atakalai, there are remnants probably of Turks. I saw them go into the city, once a week when they have markets, to buy produce. They were dressed with their skirts in the back, thrown over their heads. It was very interesting, we used to take from school, tours there, but this time I was there as an emigrant. When we crossed into Yugoslavia, they made us all get out and they frisked us. Now this was wrong, too. They took away, some people took mementos, one man had a few, like the equivalent of silver dollars, they took it away. One of them didn't want to give it up, so the guide, we had a guide, gave him hell, "Do you want us to stay here for ever? Give it to them, let's go." It was wrong. That trip from Yugoslavia to the Italian border was a long trip too, but when we reached the Italian border, they were only looking if you were smuggling tobacco. They made believe to open the trunk but they didn't make you open it, and they let us go. Then we went to the panhandle of Italy, the northern part, to reach the border of France, Modane. We crossed four borders. In Modane they made us get out. No, while in Italy we ran out of food, and I went with my brother looking for bread, that's all I needed. If I had a piece of bread to keep me going. It took us almost an hour 'til we found a bakery in Milano, we couldn't make ourselves understood, so they didn't know what we were looking for until we found one, and we bought bread, and we went to Modane. Over there, they put us like into a stockade, and soldiers threw bread at us. They were fighting like animals, the people, after all, it's a long trip. And they made us take showers. It was like open-air showers, and these guards, the women took showers, these guards got busy to see the women take showers. They made themselves busy around them, you see? I didn't even fight for bread in that stockade because I did not have any more strength. I was completely exhausted, so, a soldier saw me sitting there on the side. He felt sorry for me, he brought me bread with some kind of canned fish. I ate the bread, the fish, I didn't know what it was. Then it was another long trip, almost the whole of France to Paris. In Paris, we found more emigrants. It's waves and waves of people, unbelievable what you saw. We had to change stations in Paris. But I also found in Paris, at the station, a lot of Jewish students from East Europe, hungry for knowledge, and they were a happy go lucky bunch, and they were playing instruments; violin, balalaikas, and singing Jewish love songs which I never heard, our mother tongue in Transylvania was Hungarian. We were integrated with the Hungarians, culturally, economically, it was controlled by Jews because the Hungarians were busy ruling the country, they were not in a majority. Out of 18 million, there were only 10 million Hungarians, including the Jews, and the Jews helped along very well to melodize. We have Irving Berlin here, the Hungarians had one. He was just as good as Irving Berlin, with a hit song every week. I forgot to mention, during the War, that the state show, we only had state shows, the actors, there were no male actors, only the women took the part of the male, dressed as men. My brother was a (?), my mother sent him with a salami on his way to the battlefield. In Budapest he wanted to see a show, you couldn't get tickets for money, but if he gave them food, they gave you tickets. He gave the salami (he laughs) they were very happy. That's the conditions we had. ALLEE: Let's see, you were in the station in Paris, and the students were singing their songs. SALAMON: Yeah, and because they, the Poles were strict Catholics, they didn't want to mix with the Jews. So the Jews developed their own culture, and I didn't know, it was very well developed because here, he lives in the United States, Bashevis Singer won a Nobel Prize writing literature in Jewish, Yiddish. Jewish is not a language, it's a German language, 80 percent German and 20 percent mixed from other nations. Then from Paris we arrived finally at night in Belgium, and I noticed that had Hotel Warsaw, Hotel Lemberg. These towns where big Jewish populations were, and again when they served food, like hungry animals, so my brother, I, and my sister decided to be on our own. We went to a third-rate hotel in Belgium and waited for our departure. This boat was an old broken down boat. I wouldn't trust my life in it. I heard the walls creak when the base hit those window hatches. The trip was 11 days on the ocean, and we were packed in tight, in bunkers like the army when they ship soldiers across. The women and men were separated, nobody ate the first few days, everybody was seasick. I don't think, I stayed in bed about a whole week. The last two days I finally got to taste food and when I saw the Ambrose lights, I felt fine, I know we're nearing land. At dawn, when we saw the Statue of Liberty, like welcoming you, that was such a beautiful feeling. People started to sing and they, everybody was happy, and when we docked by the Hudson, the River. already relatives came on motor boat, calling out names, looking for their loved ones. Nobody came for us. We were supposed to go to Pittsburgh, I didn't know anything about New York, but most of the people said they're going to stay in New York. I said to my brother, "We better clear out of here. Everybody is going to be in New York, it's going to be over-flooded, it's going to be flooded with people," I didn't know it was such a big city. So, we were taken to Ellis Island. There was a fellow who came about a month before us. He told us he has very rich relatives, cigar manufacturers. The rich relative turned out to be an old man rolling cigars in a window store, that's his rich uncle (he laughs) but I wrote him a note, I gave the note to a woman from the HIAS, "Would you please be good enough to deliver it to him." So I wrote him, we wrote him that we are stranded in Ellis Island, and can you do something for us. So after two days we got a telegram, I have the telegram here, "Your cousin's husband, Glick is going to come for you," so we knew what to say. So, when he came, of course, we had to make believe he's a relative, even had to kiss him. He was no relative. When we got off the ferry, that little ferry-boat at South Ferry, he says, "I lost a day's pay, and I get paid for this." We were glad to pay for it. At Ellis Island they brought about ten, 12 Portuguese seamen. They were also a happy go lucky bunch. They entertained us, you see, and then somebody called for them, they weren't there long. But it was very interesting, a Hungarian peasant boy brought an old-fashioned Victrola with him, you know with the big funnel. Everybody was laughing 'cause he had to carry it, but it kept us going. Then you met, on Ellis Island, an awful lot of people from all over the world. Italians, Greeks, Arabs. An Arab woman was hysterical and people were hysterical because you were in a room behind bars, like a prison. The windows were wire, wire glass windows, and you were sitting there talking to people. I remember there was a woman talking to my sister and she says, "Look, I'm glad you're leaving, but I'm sorry we're not going to see each other anymore." And we picked up lice, vermin. I don't know whether it was on the boat or Ellis Island, because when I got off and I told my brother, "You know I had lice?" He said so did he and my sister the same thing. And I went to a barber and told him, "Cut off my hair completely," and he says, "They don't do that here," I says. "No, I want it like shaved." And when he cut my hair, I saw lice on the towel, he knew, I couldn't help it. We were stranded on 86th Street and 3rd Avenue in a rooming house. ALLEE: Can we go back to Ellis Island for just a minute? Do you remember how long you were there? SALAMON: Must have been no more than two or three days, that' all. But there was a family, from Transylvania, a woman with a son and a beautiful girl. The son was a hunchback. She was let out on account of Christmas, she told me. She was there almost a month, and she had her husband here who arrived a year before her. They kept them there. ALLEE: Where did you sleep when you were there? SALAMON: On Ellis Island? They had like I imagine they were iron beds, yes, that's what they were. ALLEE: It was like a dormitory? SALAMON: Yeah, like a dormitory. ALLEE: And were you with adults or-- SALAMON: No, the men separate. No, with adults. ALLEE: And they never asked you, you were about 16, how old were you? SALAMON: Sixteen and a half, and when I arrived, I was 16 years and eight months. ALLEE: And how old was your brother and sister? SALAMON: My brother was 21, still young, but he already went, they drafted you at age 18, he was three years in the War already, and we never knew that they had an American Army in Europe. They kept it from us, and there was detachments of American soldiers in some of our neighboring towns, but when the Roumanians came in, they left. They only stayed in Budapest and they brought carloads of food for the people. That's the only place they remained. As the neighboring countries took over, they left, that I remember. ALLEE: So your brother was 21 and your sister? SALAMON: Was 27. ALLEE: I see, you were the baby. SALAMON: Yes, but we separated. Everybody on his own. Do you want to hear more about the immigration or what happened here? ALLEE: Both, if you have more to tell me about the immigration, we can finish that and then get on to whatever here. Let's just turn the tape over. This is the end of side one. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO SALAMON: I feel like I had two lives. You plant something in the ground, it has its roots, and then you transplant it where it stays permanently. That's what happened to me. You put an end, and forget about your childhood, I became a man, here, all of a sudden. I started life new, amongst people whose language I didn't understand, different life, everything was different but I never despaired, I was optimistic. I forgot to mention, the way we went on the old broken-down ship on steerage, the African slaves could not have had worse accommodations, that's true, the slaves that were brought over from Africa. ALLEE: What was it like for you, in steerage, did you have a place to sleep? SALAMON: They packed us in, I stayed, two tiers, but who cared, we wanted transportation. The ship was lice-infested, the trip over the ocean lasted 11 days, and was stormy. I stayed in bed eight days without food and water, the rest I mentioned. Now you want to hear what-- ALLEE: You didn't mention the name of your ship. SALAMON: Zeeland. ALLEE: The Zeeland. SALAMON: Yes, Red Star Line, December 13, 1920 I saw the Statue of Liberty. There's another thing I forgot to mention, men had to resign citizenship of Roumania, you had to give it up, never to come back. So we were stateless with my brother until we became American citizens. That's why I was surprised when people were here 15, 20 years, never bothered taking out citizen papers. Here I could hardly wait for that paper and I was happy and I appreciated it. And this is the only country where you're not a stranger, because we all are strangers. It's only a matter of time who got here first. ALLEE: That's true. SALAMON: You see, but if you went any country, anywhere else in the world, if you come from elsewhere you're a stranger forever, but not here. And then another thing, as a Jew, this is the first time I was an equal, on an equal basis with everybody else. There was no discrimination, no laws and specially against them. You see, when Napoleon emerged in Europe, there were only one million Jews in Europe, but he was the first one that emancipated the Jews. He was the first one who said they're entitled to equal rights. Switzerland only gave citizenship to Jews in 1914, as late as that. You want me to talk about landing here? ALLEE: Sure. SALAMON: We landed in Yorkville because that's where the Germans and Hungarians lived, most of the Jews landed on the East Side but we were closer culturally to the Germans and Hungarians. We would rather mix with them than with Russian Jews. We were too far apart. It's only the second generation that became one Jew. But not the first one. A lot of Jews from the East Side went to the Bronx, but the Hungarian Jews, a lot of them were diehards, they came to Astoria. They wanted to live away from them. They felt superior, like the German Jews, only because they were better educated. In Russia they had no chance. But parents, those immigrants, worked very hard to make sure that children had an education. It took the Italians two generations, the Jews it only took one generation. They made strides very fast. If you notice, the Jews are not anymore in the retail business, it's the Orientals. Jews are professionals mostly, college teachers, and they live in small towns and their children inter-marry, they're a dying race, the Jews in the United States. When I came to the United States, there were only a hundred million Americans, the population, Canada was only nine million in 1920. That's, at the time Austro-Hungary had 60 million, it was a powerful nation too. I landed on 86th Street and 3rd Avenue, the room was a dollar and a half a night but you get smart when you have to. Necessity is a good teacher. So for a quarter less, for a dollar and a quarter a night, I went with my valise, I had practically nothing in it, to 89th Street and 3rd Avenue, which was a quarter cheaper. And during the day, I looked for a job desperately. But there was, I could only get jobs from the German paper, and there was discrimination against Jews at that time too. The English paper used to advertise for Irish Catholics, I remember, and the Germans also. If they asked if you're Jewish, they wouldn't hire you. But they have laws against that. The utilities never hired Jews until after the War, the Second World War. When I was down to my, must have had a dollar and a half left, I begged the woman in that rooming house. "Will you let me stay for a dollar? I want to look for a job." She let me go, so I took my valise, I went to Central Park, I stayed on a bench, somebody tipped me off, "If you go to City Hall, get the German paper, eleven o'clock at night, and be on the job first, you have a chance." So I stayed in Central Park and a policeman came over, spoke to me in English, I couldn't answer, and walked away. They had no criminals in those days. So they were looking for porters in Brooklyn Jewish Hospital and I ran to the Hospital, I was there after 12 o'clock and stayed in the lobby until the morning. It wa swarm, and a woman came, she looked like a nurse, Miss Klau, and she asked, "Who was here first?" And I said, "Me," so she hired me. She takes me, she hands me a mop, I didn't know what to do with it, to mop the toilets. I didn't even know how to handle a mop, I didn't know what it was for. So she asked me, "What did you do?" She said, "Take off your jacket, put your heart into it," I didn't even know about this, the first job, so she saw I wasn't good for it, she says, "Come with me," she takes me down into the basement. It was the morgue, and she tells the doctor, "Salamon will give them a hand," I didn't know what it was about. So we pull out a drawer. There was a woman, a body, she was heavy too, a fat woman, and that stupid morgue man tells me grab her under the arm. I should have grabbed her legs, I almost dropped her, to put her body on a marble table which has a drain in the center, you know, with a pail under it. So I thought I'd die but I needed a job. So at lunchtime we dipped our hands in a pail of alcohol and we went to eat. This morgue man who worked in the muck, he was not normal person, with his bloody apron, he went to the dining room to eat, and don't you think they had a second autopsy in the afternoon, they never had two, that day when I started they had two. So, I didn't sleep that night, it bothered me but after a few weeks, the laboratory technician got sick and quit so they gave me the job. They paid 40 dollars a month, they gave me room and board and laundry, as a technician they gave me 60. The hours were from seven in the morning until six at night, six and half days a week, and one hour lunch, 11 hours a day. Those were long hours for little pay. So you want me to continue this story? I stayed there over a year and then I wanted to better myself. I was not a skilled laborer so I, the only jobs I could get in these restaurants, they had the exchange buffet, who are busy lunchtime. You go in there 10, 11 o'clock and if they need you, they'll hire you, give you a dollar, and they give you a meal. And if they didn't need you, then I went to 31st Street, the San Franciscan Monastery is there on the West Side. They gave you a sandwich for nothing. Then I went to the library, I wanted to educate myself, and I stayed, it was very nice, pleasant, 42nd Street Library. I stayed there 'til about five, six o'clock, and I walked home from 42nd Street to 84th Street, even in the winter, to save the nickel carfare, and that sandwich was my last meal for the day. I didn't eat until the next day, I went to sleep hungry. Then I decided, summer season came in the Catskills, with another fellow to go as waiters to the Catskills. So we went from an agency downtown for five dollars and he sent us to a hotel. To save fare, we took the ferry, we thought we're going to sleep an the ferry but there was so much noise, people went for good times, and they all, some of them slept there on the boat, so we couldn't sleep. So we rented a car, he said, "Pay us want you want," we gave him like a half a dollar, took us to the hotel and the hotel said, "e told the agent not to send us any more help." So we said, "We don't have money to go home," so they made a collection amongst the guests and we each got like, I think it was like two dollars, and I had to go home and go to the Village and eat a sandwich or something, I don't remember what but the nerve of the hotel, at least he should have given us a cup of coffee with a roll. We came starved, hungry and here he sends us away. Then he sent us on another job and we lasted a season which meant like $250. I always wanted to be on my own, you see, independent, because the wages they paid were pitifully small. So we started, it was during the height of the Depression, in the sugar business for ten cents a bag, to carry a bag of sugar to bakeries. It was hard-earned money and my brother, at that time my brother was selling the sugar and I was delivering it. He said, "To hell with this life in the city," he went on a farm, and I survived the Depression very well because as a salesman I was on my own, I made my own salary. Nine years I lived in rooming houses. I was engaged to my wife a year, I gave her the diamond ring in Central Park and she couldn't run home fast enough to show it to her parents. Those days marriages were made to last. I'm married 57 years, and for my in-laws it was getting rid of another meal. My wife had her formative years in Denora, Pennsylvania, and her father worked in the steel mills. She told me how she brought a pail with lunch to the steel mill at noon., that was the way. And I remember there was a man whom I knew, he lost his arm in the steel mill. They gave him a job as a night- watchman because he became a cripple. Today if this happens it costs a million, a million and a half. And that's all you got in those days. Incidentally, the peasants in Transylvania, before World War I, when they were in hock and they were in financial trouble, they scraped together $30 to come to the United States to work a year or two, go home with a hundred, two hundred dollars to pay off debts. They were farmers there. Here they worked in the coal mines and in the steel mills. They lived in rooming houses. But during the War they were stuck here so they came home with a thousand, fifteen hundred dollars. When we sold, my father came back, but when we sold the house my father, he, first of all when he came back he aged ten years, he was 57, 58 years old. He looked like a man of past 70. That;s how he aged during that short time. He sold the house to an American, I mean an emigrant who went back, the Roumanians made propaganda, "Come back, you got your own beautiful country. We'll give you two cows and we'll give you some land. Come back home." And they did but the one who bought our house must have been a bootlegger. He gave $10,000 for our house which is more than $100,000 today, considerably more. And he went, we had five windows facing the street. He took the middle window, knocked the door out and he made an American style bar, you see, he was already an enterprising guy. The children still spoke English amongst themselves, but I wonder how long, if they remained there, they were little children, like nine , ten years old, that must have been the end of it. But I went back after 51 years, it was still a beautiful house but they made a bar out of it. ALLEE: You mean like a restaurant? SALAMON: More for drinking I guess, it was on like at least an acre of ground in the city, it was beautiful. The population when I left was 10,000, when I came back, 75,000. Under Communism nobody wants to work, people ran to the city, but it's modern like here, there are new homes, they built new homes, they had a beautiful new hotel. When I went to visit, a roommate of mine, a Roumanian, she went like this to speak like this and closes the door. I say to her, "Why, it's your own country?" Then i found out he was taken away also for some reason, everybody they lock up. I walked with a man on the main square and I stopped under a window somewhere and the man all of a sudden, I thought he got crazy. I says, "What happened to you?" He says to me, "This is a police station." So I says, "So what about it? I can't stand, stay here under the window?" He says, "I'm going to stop in front of a police station?" That's how scared they were. ALLEE: When you went back? SALAMON: Yeah, 51 years later. I was glad to be out of Communist countries. ALLEE: I was going to ask you about when you were a little boy, before the War, what it was like there, before-- SALAMON: I had a more beautiful life than my in-laws children who eventually grew up in the city, New York City. They were all run over by cars or horses. And I had a free life because, first of all, my, it was a big family, so my mother was glad if I left the house and went horse-back riding, you know, I was busy with horses and it was beautiful country. In the spring I went picking strawberries, you could go in the woods, nobody would bother you, there was no crime. ALLEE: And you said your father was well-to-do? What did he do? SALAMON: Yes, he had a tannery and I remember in 1913 before World War I, there was a Serbian who shipped my father a car-load of hides and Austria put a tariff on pigs. They called it a "Pig War," that's how it started, and this man complained bitterly, he said, "It has to come to a war, they don't let us live." Austria-Hungary was a powerful nation, that fell apart, and when he, he also was in the export business. I went to elementary school, Hungarian school, then I switched over to high school, to German school, because they did not have a state school. They took you in as a Jew, provided you paid a high fee. My father had to pay for three boys, you know, tuition fee. He used to thank God every year, another year passed by. It was very important to have a college degree because if you go to the army, you only serve one year instead of three, and you become an officer, you see, they send you to Officer's Training School, it meant a lot. But I did not wait for graduation, I had a year and a half to go, I was the only Jew in the class, it was a Protestant school, our area was primarily Protestant, very few Catholics. And I even sang in the choir, in the Church, it was simple ceremony, not like Catholics, you know, or the fundamental Jews. And I remember the minister used to preach about war, you know, and we sang beautiful war songs during the War, in the Church. It was a little different, they were more German than the Germans in Germany. They were settled there 800 years ago from Flanders, which is part of France. Transylvania was primarily woods, so they settled in the valleys and they had the most fertile land, and the Jews with a high birth rate at the time, spread out amongst them. They did not make a living from the Germans, rather from the Roumanians or Hungarians. Actually, they boycotted us, they would not buy in a Jewish retail store. Because I remember one school-mate tole me he needed a collar button, and he said to me, "Will you please go in and buy it for me?" That dry-goods store was a Jew. I says to him, "Why are you sending me, go for yourself," so he told me the truth, "We're not supposed to buy from Jew," you know kids, so that was an indication. ALLEE: You were going to tell me about finding that again here. SALAMON: Well, where I left off there, I settled in Boynton Beach, there is a complex of condominiums where Jews had to go, where Jews happened to go. ALLEE: And where is this? SALAMON: Boynton Beach, between Delray and Lake Worth. ALLEE: This is recently? SALAMON: Yes, now, I'm going through it, where I left out there, I'm going through there now, unbelievable. So, those Jews are retired people, they are not in contact with the town. The only time you see them when they go to a restaurant or they go shopping, it's a self-contained community. They have their own movies, their own playgrounds, two pools, they have cardrooms, library, state shows every Saturday. But I, I am busy in real estate, I own real estate here. In my semi-retirement I built there. Now on a small scale, I'm not a developer, I just took my accumulated money and tried to save it, protect it against inflation. So never did I expect they're highly anti-Jewish, the building department. I was introduced as a Born Again Christian. That was the furthest from my mind, you see. Now, at Easter time when they read the Psalm about the high priest with the pervious Jews killing Christ, I couldn't take it. All I said, "These priests were stooges of the Roman Empire." So there was silence. So one man with a sense of humor said, "Well that's another version of the King James Bible." But the head of the building department comes over to me, said to me, "Do you believe in Jesus Christ?" I wa so taken back, I says to him, "Well, he was a Jew, besides I know too much about science, it's not important to me." So he said to me, "Well I understand people that are interested in science and not interested in religion." I was never a practicing Jew, they force you to be a Jew when you see all your relatives killed. My wife says I am very hard, I don't think of all these things. She doesn't see me cry when nobody sees me, I feel it when I think of it many times, but I don't show it. So I have properties there, it's commercial. I have a man taking care of my interests, he's from West Virginia, he worked in the coal mines in West Virginia. He probably never saw a Jew, neither did Boynton Beach never see Jews before, so this man became my handyman, he takes care of my interests. So, he says to me they don't like me, I says to him, "What did I do to them they shouldn't like me?" He said they don't let me rent, I says to him, "Why? I have no violation. The zoning is correct." My tenants have to go before a review board, they tell them, "You don't have to rent from Salamon, go over to another place and we'll give you the occupancy in five minutes." The review board meets once a month, so I have to wait a month, I have deposits, I lose rent, he don't give you an answer, he tells me, "Move the garbage dumpster from one place to another." Three times to move it, three times to file plans, three times to pay an architect. Do you think this right? So I got places that are empty a year, and they tell the people, "If you go in there, we'll fine you $500 a day." Isn't it discrimination? ALLEE: Sounds that way. SALAMON: Well this is the United States of America, you wouldn't believe it. I asked them, "Why do I have to enclose the dumpster, nobody else did it, only me?" He says their grandfather didn't, I said, "So am I." He takes out his records, says, "There's nothing to show that your grandfather didn't." I said to him, "Well, I have a letter to show where the tenant." this is for other repair, "The tenant was there and he had three bays and he should give up one bay because they didn't let a year before a man settle from upstate New York, to open a print shop because his five gallon can of print will contaminate the air." And across the street is a big publishing house. Then he says, "No it's not the ink, it's the parking, you only have parking for twelve cars, ten bays." I says, "I have parking for 23 cars, I'm the only one that has parking," so, he sends me a letter to change the number of bays, each bay has its own zoning which is wrong, same building, so he said to me, "Start with numbering backward." I says to him, "I don't care how you number them, it's the same location." Here I'm getting nowhere, is this right in the United States to do that? So, my man from West Virginia, this handyman, said to me he doesn't know what they got against me, so I told him, "I'm a Jew." You see, it's unbelievable, and the railroad, none of them have parking, only me, this is facing railroad tracks, everybody parked by the tracks. The railroad went and put ties, a fence, it's a monstrosity, it's a disgrace for the city. They didn't put it in front of my building, so I showed them, you know, like fighting Indians. Now you want me to show you here? ALLEE: Yeah, we're just about running out of tape. This is the end of Interview Number 175 with Lazarus Salamon, it is now 2:17 PM.