APPEL: Interview 009. This is Willa Appel and I'm speaking with Guerino Salerni. Today is Friday, January 25, 1985 and it's 4:00 PM. Guerino came from Italy in 1919 and we're about to begin the interview. Guerino, if I may call you that, can, can we begin by your telling us when you, you were born, what year you were born in, and where? SALERNI: I was born in 1905 in a small town in Central Italy known as Salle, in the province of Chieti, which since then has been changed to the Province of Pescara. Uh, I was a second child of a peasant family. Uh, my father was a construction worker, more like a stone mason, beside being a peasant. They spent a good portion of time in America, yeah, and the male figure that I lived with was my grandfather, my grandfather Luigi. His name was Salerni also, although he was my mother's father, not my father's father. Luigi was a very interesting character. He had been a carabinieri . . . APPEL: A policeman? SALERNI: A policeman. And he had been a, he was a town's builder, among other things, and for a short time he was the mayor of the town. He had been the President of the President of the Consiglieri here, the, of the Town Council. The mayor died and he became mayor for a short while. I went to the local public schools till the fourth grade, and that's as far as the town had carried the classes. And then came World War One, not two, and somehow school was ( he laughs ) not exactly functioning. So I had a little training in the fifth grade, but never got too far with it. And I remember in 1918, before the war ended, there was the, the gathering of the grapes, which was very important for the town, the vendemmia. And I was about the only young man in the town, and I was barely twelve. And the ladies of the town, they would not tend to grapes with their feet, that was purely a man's job. Well, I was about the only man, I told you I was only twelve, so I spent about two weeks doing nothing but tramping on grapes. My, myself, my Aunt Carmela, my Aunt Irene, my Aunt Nicola. And by the end of the two weeks I was glad, the grape collection was over. ( he laughs ) Then, of course, was, the war was over and the men started to come back. Of course, my father, my father was in America at the time. And my older brother was in America, too. They both registered in the, for the draft in the American Army, but neither was called because the father was too old and the brother was a little bit too young, although he tells me that he was called to go to the Draft Board for an interview and he said, "The war is over, the Armistice is signed, you boys all go home, see?" That's the way he tells the story. So in 1918, Papa decide to transfer his family to America and, uh, by, by December the 20th, officially, we came to America. So . . . APPEL: Can you tell me a little bit about how the arrangements were made to come to America? SALERNI: Yeah. To come to America, Papa said, all right, Papa had come to America in 1896, first, 1896. He went back, he got married and my brother, he got married, my brother Augustine was born in 1899. Went back to America again. My father was the wandering type. Came back to Italy again, 1905 I was born. Came back to America, he came back to Italy in 1911, my sister was born. Because 1911 was a sad year for us, because Mama, Mama died, my mother died, see. And the year after my father remarried and the year after that he went back to America again. The years when, my, after my mother died and my father went to a were kind of, were sad years, and then came the war. And in between the war, there was an earthquake in the town, about 1914, I believe it was, an earthquake in the town. APPEL: Who was taking care of you in those years when your father was in America . . . SALERNI: Uh, well, well, my stepmother was there. My father, he remarried, my stepmother was there. Uh, we weren't exactly poor, maybe we, we owned our own house. We owned our own fields. We did till the ground, we weren't afraid to work. And Papa sent money back and, my mother, I call her "mother," actually my stepmother, she hired people and she cultivated the vineyards and she cultivated the olive grove and she cultivated the wheat fields and so on. So we did, we do okay, fine. I mean, we didn't suffer in any way, I mean, we always had plenty of food. Of course, we were in a little town, was kind of isolated. And a little incident in World War One, the telegraph wires were first brought into the town. Telegraph wires came in in 1916 or '17, '18, so, after 1913 or '14 or so, I finished the fourth grade and the fifth grade wasn't there. Was talk of sending me to the provincial town for the fifth grade, but that never happened and, uh, war years and Papa being away, my education was kind of, uh, well, kind of stopped, delayed for a while. Finally, in 19, 1918 we began to come here, see, and that's the end, I mean, that's as far as I can tell you about Italy. Well, there were little incidents, like my first day in school and, uh, the incidents during the war, planes coming over, they dropped a couple of bombs among other things. ( he laughs ) APPEL: Those are quite some incidents. SALERNI: I remember once the, the flashlights were playing all around the town and the people had never seen flashlights. They say, what's going to happen, look at all the decorations in the sky. And one older man there, my Uncle Peter, quite a character, I could tell you, I could spend a whole day talking about Uncle Peter, he says, "Don't worry." He said, "It's okay." He said, he said he was too old to go to the war. He volunteered for the service behind the lines, he said. Up where I was to last year, he said, they have them every night, they're just lights. So he kind of reassured the town. So then in the fall of 1918, 1919, before coming to America, we had to go and be seen by the American Consulate in Rome. And since I was over twelve, I had to go. You see, over twelve in Italy, boys are considered, you know, adults, no longer boys. So I spent one week in Rome, and although i did not know much about Rome I wandered all through the Forum, all through the streets. I felt at home. They were building the monument to Victor Emmanuel. There were workmen over there. Well, my grandfather was a stone mason, my father was a stone mason. I could build a dome out of stone by myself. I'd done it on the field many time. So I went wandering around and the workmen welcomed me, they didn't scare me away. I felt at home there. And then, of course, we were wandering around and one day we took the trolley, we went to St. Peter's. And as the trolley made a turn, and I look in St. Peter's Square, I had never seen anything so big, so magnificent. So we saw St. Peter's Square and then we went to the church. I knew nothing about the history of St. Peter or the Church. And we went inside and I was coming out of the church and I saw two big, two big Allied officers, they must have been, maybe American or England. To me, I was a little bit about like this, you know, they were big. And I stay open the, I stay open the door into St. Peter's. I will never forget the, the look of surprise in their face. They look in St. Peter's, they, I saw, what's the matter, big men like these, uh. American officers, they surprised that much? Of course, now, looking back, I can see why they were surprised. I don't, I was kind of surprised at those things like that. Now, let's, I spend a whole week in Rome and, I enjoyed it, I enjoyed it very much. As a boy in Rome, well, we had the first cold spell, remember you read about snow in Rome. When I was there, it snowed but didn't get to the ground. We did see snowflakes. But coming from a mountain town, it didn't bother me one bit. I mean, uh snow to me, I, made me feel at home. So, we went back to the town and in a few weeks after we left for America. We took the train to, to Naples and that was no the first time took the train was when we went to Rome. The second time when I went to Naples and we took the, we took the train, the train to a town in the middle of the, the Abruzzi and then we took the second train and that was the express from Rome to Naples. And I never saw a train nicer kept or, uh, more efficient, and more fast. What was surprising me the most that you could go from one end of the train to the other end of the train, see. Up to now, when I seen a train go by, you know, you have one wagon and it stopped, and another wagon, this kind of was the first train that when, you could go look from one end to the other. And I was saying, how they do, how can they do that, see. Of course, I learned later on how they did it. And we got to, to Naples, and got on the ship. APPEL: Who was in your party? SALERNI: Uh, me. And my stepmother, and my sister. And about, I would say, a dozen or so ladies form the town who had been called also. APPEL: Their husbands were in America? SALERNI: Their husbands were in a. And I was the only young man in the group. I was the oldest male in the group, I don't know, maybe a dozen-and-a-half or so. So we got to Naples . . . SALERNI: And you were fourteen? SALERNI: I was just finished my fourteenth birthday. On November 3rd I became fourteen. November 21 or thereabouts we left. And the ship, the, the trip was uneventful. We got in the ship on Naples. Next morning we were at, at Palermo. Couple of days after we stopped in Spain for coal. Uh, the night we passed Gibraltar, I was asleep and I, no, I complained as I could that I wanted to be awakened. They didn't wake me up. And anyhow, next morning we were on a beautiful, kind of a boy of Spain. We stopped at one of the towns to get coal for about two or three days. And we were welcomed in Spain. And every day we'd go, we'd get off the ship and go into the town, go into the market, and we got along nice with our Italian, see. So I get the impression that Italian and Spanish were the same thing. You see, I was in Spain, they all understood me for some, I found out later that Spanish is not exactly like Italian. APPEL: Were you on a freighter? SALERNI: No, no. We were a regular ship but pretty slow. I think the ship's name was Europe, Europa. APPEL: Europa? SALERNI: Europa, yeah. I believe it went out of commission shortly after that. APPEL: And can you describe what the ship was like, what your accommodations were like . . . SALERNI: The ship was very nice. We were in steerage, of course, third class. We were down below. We had a cot with just a metal grating. I don't think there was a mattress in it, maybe a blanket. We didn't mind, we didn't mind. And for a while it was nice and warm. Then it got awful cold and all the ladies, all took kind of sick. And whenever they wanted anything, they call for me and I check over the ship. Ship didn't bother me one bit, the cold didn't bother me one bit. And I, I had a grand time coming over, in spite of the cold. APPEL: And you were, you were all lodged together then. APPEL: The, the group from the town, I would say about a dozen-and-a-half or so, were part of our group, when they send us to steerage, all right, you can go down and we all went down and we all pick our own spot and they all kind of grouped together. There must have been at least a dozen women, young and old, and some girls. But I was the oldest boy there. APPEL: One other thing, did you take much, if you, did you pack up much, did you take much from . . . SALERNI: Uh, we had, we sent, we sent a trunk which we didn't have with us and each one had a little suitcase. Mama had a suitcase, I had a suitcase, I think my sister, who was about five, had a suitcase. Then, of course, after a while it got very cold. There was storm and cold. But I managed to get on deck and look around and, uh, one thing I remember the most there they had a big vat that they used to make broiled fish, codfish, known as bacala. One Sunday I got a great big chunk. That was my best meal. ( he laughs ) That was my best meal. So we finally got to New York. APPEL: How many days did it take? SALERNI: It must have taken about, at least a dozen days, one day from Naples to Palermo, then two days to Spain, three days just waiting to get coal. It was a long journey. APPEL: And do you have any sense of how many passengers there were in all? SALERNI: About a thousand, I guess. It was a rather large ship. One thousand or so. So we got to New York, it was cold, it was cold. APPEL: December? SALERNI: It was December, we actually supposed to have been admitted to the country December 20 and, uh, while we were docked in the middle of the bay, I saw a boat coming in with several men in her and I say, "Look, look, there's an American on the boat. And everybody came out to look at them, and one of them was my father, which I recognized. And my mother came over to stand by the railing and this was during Prohibition time. And we had some Italian liquor, known as Centerba. I don't know if you ever heard it. APPEL: Yes. SALERNI: Centerba from Abruzzi is almost, uh, it's almost a local delicacy. APPEL: It's a digestive. SALERNI: Whatever it is. And Mama took a bottle of Cenerba, threw to Papa, and Papa caught it. And that, that was the only incident. She said, "Hello! We're going home pretty soon." And that was that. So finally . . . APPEL: He didn't come on board? SALERNI: No, no, no. Absolutely not. He was in the little boat below, maybe about, two do, about twenty or so men, where they all look for their family. And then we must have gone to Ellis Island. We went to various things and then there had bene typhoid fever back in the boat. And they quarantined us for twenty days, for, uh, not twenty, ten days, ten days they quarantined us. And I believe they kept us in Ellis Island for the whole ten days. I remember the great big hall and some fields around. So we weren't restrained in any way, see. In the morning I go wandering around, and look around, and was, when was, when was not too cold I wander around quite a bit. If it was really blowy and cold, I went back in again. And, uh . . . APPEL: Do you remember where you slept? SALERNI: I think a little cot in a great big hall. APPEL: And where you ate? SALERNI: We ate in a, all around the cafeteria. APPEL: How do, do remember how you felt about this? SALERNI: To me it was like an adventure, like going on a picnic. Yeah, fourteen years old, in good health. To me it was a kind of a marvel, or a kind of a wonder world. I didn't, I'd grown up in the towns, I had, uh, in the school, the fourth grade, what can you learn? A little history, but not much of it. Uh, to me, I thought, some of the old men used to say that they were wondering if there was any other, any other, any other towns on the other side of mountains, I mean, we couldn't see beyond the mountains. So, after staying about ten days on Ellis Island, we were processed through on the day after New Year in 1920. And we went to the various places, we landed, Papa met us there. We took a boat to downtown Manhattan, to the Battery. We took the old Second Avenue El, which since has been torn down, to Broadway Astoria. We got off on Broadway Astoria, Pap took the suitcase on the shoulder, Mama then took my little suitcase, I held my sister by the hand. He said, "Let's take a trolley car home." And then he looked and says, "It's not coming. Let's start walking." I would say about half a mile to the house. We walked down Broadway Astoria to the house, a cold water flat, on old Ridge Street, Astoria. We were on the third floor. There was an Italian family on the second floor from the same town, a friend of ours. There was another one on the first floor, and they made us very much at home. And those were the first year or so in America. Cold water flat. We used to have a stove in the front room, a little kerosene stove in the rear room. Two-room level windows in between, a kitchen/living room combined. Me and my brother slept here. My sister slept here, and my father slept there. APPEL: If we can go back a little bit . . . SALERNI: Yeah, go ahead. APPEL: . . . to Ellis Island, do you have any memory of how your mother and perhaps the other women of Salle felt about being quarantined? SALERNI: There was kidding, they didn't know what was happening, you see. They knew they were being detained. They didn't know what for. They didn't know what, I didn't know what, what typhoid fever was. And they, they were wondering if we were going to be sent back or not, see. The, the apprehension, the worry, the cold, of course, inside it was warm, but you couldn't even go out, in a strange country. So, finally, uh, went to the doctor and so and so, and so and so, and so and so. APPEL: Do you remember those examinations? SALERNI: Uh, I believe I had, uh, I don't know whether I got vaccinated there or not. I remember going through the various lines and, of course, we had the Centerba small bottles. We must have had about a dozen of those, maybe a little more, see, a little more, see. We were seared, you see, you're not supposed to carry that, see. I had some in the knapsack, Mama had some all over, I think even the little sister had a couple of things in there, in her little bag. Because all the people from the town wanted to send a bottle of Centerba, to their, to their relatives in America, see. It was Prohibition, on top of that. APPEL: Centerba, as I recall, is what they call the digestive, which you'd have as a . . . SALERNI: No, no, no, no, no, no. It's not, uh, ferochina, not feruchina. Centerba is, I would say, ninety percent proof, pur alcohol, with very little taste. Almost like vodka, except it's green. That's not for your digestion, oh, no. The men used to go to America, used to get a couple of bottles of that. They claimed, at least they believed, that it was good for everything that ailed, anything that ailed, and you drink some Cenerba and it goes away. (?) And nobody look at it, and even if they did look at it, they didn't know what it was. So that was that. APPEL: But it sounds like the combination of being detained and not understanding why and having this illegal . . . SALERNI: Yeah, yeah, that was very, very, no, we worry about the illegal Centerba, we didn't worry. In fact, I didn't even know it was illegal, see. They say, watch out, they don't like Centerba in America, watch out. I didn't even know it was illegal. The apprehension of not knowing, not knowing whether you're going to be going to America or go back to Italy. For about ten days that was, that was, kind of worried everybody. Didn't bother me a bit, I enjoyed the trip coming, I would've enjoyed the trip back, going back to the town. I didn't care, my grandfather was there, my grandmother was there, my uncles were there, my school pals were there. I uh, I, it didn't bother one bit. APPEL: Did you have misgivings about leaving your home town? SALERNI: No. The spirit of adventure was so strong that at the time I didn't realize, you know, that, you know, you go to America, it's, you know, you got there for good, see. Ahh, to me it was another adventure. APPEL: What did, what expectations did you have about coming to America? SALERNI: Well, the great land of America, everybody spoke so much, well, of America and, the new land, a new experience, a new opportunity. Everybody spoke well of America during, the, in January of 19, 1919, after the war. Several boys had been in the American Army and they took a leave and came to the town. And I remember seeing them. I remember one special one, Fred D'Aderio, who had been, was in the Marines and he came to the town. He had a raincoat, see, and there all the men stay in the, in the hats, with the big umbrella. This fellow sty in there without the umbrella, but the coat, I looked around the coat, the water doesn't go through. I'd never seen a raincoat that the water didn't through. A nice, husky young man and he, he didn't mind standing in the rain with this, with this, with this waterproof American raincoat. I remember him. I remember several other boys who had been in France and came back, and they are going to big feast, and America was the land of adventure, see, the land of adventure. And, uh, I didn't feel sad about leaving or anything, see. I remember my grandfather kissed me, he was kind of sad. I didn't realize that was the last time I was going to see him, see. I guess he did, he did realize that. So that's about, that's about all I can say about, uh, Ellis Island. APPEL: Do you, when you were talking about the ship, it sounded like it was fun for you. Do you remember anybody being sick on the ship? SALERNI: Oh. All the ladies, for about, oh, three or four days, they wouldn't even get up. And they used to holler for me, get me this, get me that, get me other thing, which I ran all over the place. I didn't mind doing it. APPEL: Did you know that someone had typhoid fever while you were on the ship? SALERNI: No, no, we didn't know anything on the ship, absolutely nothing. We, uh, we were, we were, we, I enjoyed the trip very much. And until we got into the storm and cold weather and the mid-Atlantic, all the ladies enjoyed it. There was dancing aboard, and there were harmonica players, and it was fun all over. And they would give us a ration of wine on the, on the ship. And since the ladies of our group didn't drink, all the men kind of, used to, befriended us, because of the wine, see. See, after the dinner, they all picked pour wine, which, which was okay, we weren't going to drink it anyhow. APPEL: Was this, were all of the people on board Italian? SALERNI: Uh, as far as I know, yes. The ship was sailed from Naples, took up more people at Palermo. Took up some coal in Spain, I think we're all Italian. And this was the first group of people from Italy that came to America after World War One, at least from our town. So that's as far as I can recall Ellis Island. The great big halls, public cafeteria. I believe we slept in a great big room in cots. There were many little compartments. That's about it. APPEL: Did it seem an impressive place to you? SALERNI: It did, yeah. It did. I'd seen, well, it was about as large a building as I'd seen outside of St. Peter's, see. And one thing I remember, white bread with grape jelly. Grape marmalade, grape jelly. I see people put it on the bread, I do the same thing, it was kind of sweet, it tasted, I had never seen, uh, jelly before. In the town, somehow, you know there wasn't any. I taste it, I like it pretty much, so I kind of filled up on that and on other things. APPEL: Did you eat, was the bread that you had at home whole wheat bread, generally? SALERNI: Yeah. The bread we had at home was either cornbread or whole wheat bread or a combination of both. APPEL: And was the white bread, did it seem special? SALERNI: No. The white bread seemed special, yes. It's a typical American white bread that you get here, it's very white, very pasty-like, see. With, with, with the jelly I kind of liked it. But the bread we had at home was fairly good. The, the town was self-sustaining, practically. The town was a remarkable town, I learned that here, not there. It was a typical medieval town. After the fall of the Roman Empire, and Italy was more or less invaded or outlaws was in others. People flew to the hill towns, and this was a typical hill town on a cliff. Three sides surrounded by a cliff, one side had a wall and the only way to get to it, there was a ramp, a straight ramp with a door and a wall on each side so you couldn't come up with a battering ram and break the door, see. Now, that didn't occur to me. The door was there, the doors were rock, but the frame was there. But when I saw the, medieval architecture here, I said, I told them about the castles and the hill towns of Italy, they say that's the town I was born. I remember the door, I remember the wall to keep the battering ram from breaking down the door. That was, that was the town. It was a self-sustaining town, because practically the only thing they bought was salt. My grandmother had a loom in the house to weave their own cloth. Bought wool from the sheeps and linen, because they used to raise their own, their own plants that make linen. What do they call it? APPEL: Flax. SALERNI: Their own flax, they raise their own. I tell you, they didn't buy anything. The few liras that Papa sent from America was sufficient for us. APPEL: Since you have such a strong visual sense, do you have any memory at the time of seeing the Statue of Liberty? SALERNI: Yes, but you know, it was another statue to me. It was just another statue. It's like when I was in Rome, I went all through the Forum. To me it was another bunch of ruins. We had them in the town, there was an old church that was fallen down. We had a little castle that had fallen down. We had a landslide, when one of our house fall down. To me it was another bunchy of ruins. To me, that's the, that's the Roman Forum. I remember going inside of the Pantheon of Rome. What I remember is a big hole on top with some light coming through, a little rain, see. I didn't know the doors were the oldest bronze doors in the world still in operation, still in operation. They are the ancient Roman doors, they are still being used today. I didn't know any of that. I didn't know St. Peter was a wonder of the world. I didn't know that the Colonnade is five hundred feet across, that the cupola where we went up to is forty-five stories high, four hundred and fifty, I didn't know any of that. APPEL: When you, when you got to America and your father picked you p and in those first early days, did you have any sharp early impressions of things that surprised you or tickled your fancy? SALERNI: The train ride. Of course, I'd had the, had a train ride from the town to Rome and from the town to Naples. The train ride. The place where we lived was an old tenement house. The people around were mostly, were mostly Italians like us, immigrants like us. I was taken to school. We landed, actually landed here after the quarantine on January 2nd. February 1, I went to school because they said no use going to school earlier, they're going to start a new class, and so on. I went to school and the teacher said, "What grade did you do in Italy?" I said, "The fourth grade." "Good, we put you in the fourth grade." See. And, uh . . . APPEL: Which is for nine-year-olds, and . . . SALERNI: Yeah, I was twelve, I was fourteen, I was fourteen, and, uh, Papa sent me an American grammar in Italy and I have studied on the way so I thought I knew English when I landed here. I didn't realize that when I went to the grocery store and started to speak my version of English, he didn't understand me. Anyhow, I went to the class, went to school. And I was put in the fourth grade and my sister Marie was started in the first grade and in the class I got along fairly well because I was the Italian boy who could do the arithmetic. Suddenly, everybody wanted to see my arithmetic homework. Well, I had arithmetic in Italy and I got along very nicely with that so that in two-and-a-half years I went from the fourth grade to the eighth grade and I graduated, that was it, that was it. And to top it all off, they gave me the English medal for the school. APPEL: This is the end of side one. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO APPEL: This is the beginning of side two of the interview with Guerino Salerni. We had gone back for a moment and we're talking again about Ellis Island and asked whether you remembered any of the other people on Ellis Island, whether you remembered the doctors or any of the people who were the staff of Ellis Island? SALERNI: Uh, they looked at us and they examined us. We must have been as healthy as they make 'em. However, one went in one line after another and, uh, I believe they, they put us through Ellis Island when they first landed, which was on December the 20th and we were admitted on December the 20th, although we were not allowed to leave until the ten days were over. And I remember a lot of doctors, a lot of nurses, a lot of people checked this and checked that. And that's about all. It was just another event. APPEL: It was another event? SALERNI: Another event, yeah. I remember more about the cold wind that swept the island and how I liked, like to get out to the building and wander around the island and go back when I got too cold and back again. And, and the white bread with the, with the jelly on it. With the grape jelly on it. APPEL: You said a moment ago when the machine we was not on that you felt like the mascot of the island. SALERNI: More on the ship than the island, more on the ship because, oh, while on the island there was the same people on the island. Moreover we were kind of, kind of apprehensive and kind of awaiting something to happen, but on the ship they were happy and going on an adventure and they were, a little more, a little more friendly. And the strange part is I always wanted to go back to Ellis Island and never did. So one of these days I'm going to go back. APPEL: Oh, I think you should. SALERNI: One of these days I'm going to go back. APPEL: It's what they're doing is extremely interesting. SALERNI: Yeah. When I was in school, one of my friends did a thesis, I believe, and turn the Ellis Island into a museum of immigration. Now the boy who did that is Vito Battista. I don't know if you ever heard of him. Vito ran for mayor a couple of times, he was a fellow student of mine. For a while we worked together and so on and he did that thesis he did something his idea was that a Center for Italian Culture, which was to be built in the village at the foot of Fifth Avenue and taken two blocks the other side of Washington Park, combine them and having a Center for Italian Culture with the Consulate, Italian library, Italian restaurants, Italian clubs. I have the drawings home, sorry I didn't take them down. it was never built, was only, was only school drawings. But Vito Battista did a thesis on Ellis Island and I don't know if he still has the drawings or not. By the way, Vito was born in Italy, also Bari, and he came over when he was two or three years old. It might be good to interview him. APPEL: It's a good idea. I have one other question, and it's a kind of broad bush question and that is, how do you feel when you look back about coming to America and how coming to America shaped your life in a way . . . SALERNI: Well, I have to look back, see. The way things were going, I was an ignorant peasant. And my brain wasn't too well developed, although in the town we had our own code of ethics, and believe me, it was some code of ethics. For example, if an older boy struck a younger boy, he was ostracized. You could beat up a boy your own age, your own size, but if you raise your hand to a smaller boy, you were, you were, you were out, you were a coward, you were a vigliacco, you were just absolutely impossible, se. And if you raise your hand to a woman, a young lady, you were out altogether. A sort of code of ethics. And if you told a lie to one of the boys, you were ostracized, you were a bugiardo, you were worse than a criminal, see. And somehow that, that, that code of ethics that ran through the town, I never forgot, never forgot. Course, I new there was the adventure in the outside world, and when I look back it was like opening up my mind. I would have been condemned to being an ignorant, ignorant peasant, most likely I would have gone into the army at twenty, maybe I would have got about a bit, but my education would have been gone, absolutely gone. Papa thought when he was in America he sent me to school in the town, the provincial town of Christi, but that never happened, it was wartime, and upheaval and everything else. For practical purposes my education in Italy, it was over in fourth grade and that's it. APPEL: That's the one that meant the most . . . SALERNI: That's what counts, that's what counts. Never mind my Master of Fine Arts from Yale over there, which is in Latin, which I manage, I can just barely manage to understand, see. But this is it, this is it, this is it. APPEL: The Bachelor of Architecture. From New York University. SALERNI: New York University. That's the Master of Fine Arts from Yale. If you know Latin, you maybe can, maybe understand it. APPEL: I don't know Latin. SALERNI: Don't know Latin? Too bad. One thing I regret, I had two years of French, three years of Italian here, but no Latin. Well, you can't learn everything. What else you want to know? And my wife is a Bachelor of Education, Boston University. I have a Master of Fine Arts but looking back the school I had at P.S. 83, dedicated mathematician, as fine as I've met anyplace. My first school in America and Miss Irene Schultz, beautiful blonde. I wasn't attracted to her, because she was blonde and I was too young for that. But looking back, fine woman, fine lady. And she was patient with me, she taught me English as best she could and, uh, I'm grateful to her. Another great teacher was in the sixth grade, James J. Taunton, fine, fine teacher. APPEL: Did you, in those early years particularly, stay in touch with the other people who had come from Salle? SALERNI: Some, yes, and some no. I was practically the only boy that came from Salle, see, and the other that come here earlier were older. My brother had come here in 1914, just before the war broke out. He was in a different world, he was, he was six years older than me. It was kind of a different world. And those who came a little after me, 1921, 1922, 1923, somehow, first of all, they were, some I didn't even know they were younger, when they were older, I never got into the group of the boys from the same town. Which is how my wife came, a little after, 1922 . . . APPEL: She was from Salle. SALERNI: From Salle also. And her father had been in America and he served in the American Army, so she came in on an American passport and she was a citizen. She's say, I came in as an American, you came in as, uh, in steerage, as a stranger. She always reminds me of that, yeah. So I didn't quite first we didn't live in exactly a local community where most of the paesani were. Paesani, the people from the same town. And so, I didn't get in, in with that crew, and then I was, sent into day school, which was a life saver, that really was, uh, mind-exploding experience. From a small town to an American school, to an American school here in 1920. It was an experience. And, of course, the high school was excellent, because there were people pretty much like me, my own age. A lot of them had come from the European countries and we organized our own social group. We used to have dances, oh, every couple of weeks. My high school days were absolutely pleasant days. And my college days were excellent because, first of all, the students were more or less my own age, there was no distinction whether you had come from Italy or whether you had been American born, you were a student and you were, you were rated on your, your ability and on your experience. The dean liked me very much. The dean was, uh, the dean had been raised and educated in France, his first degree was Bachelor of Philosophy. Very interesting comment. One of the boys that went to school with me, when he graduated, went to Russia. (?) and he went to Russia. I might have gone to Russia if I'd have gotten a job in Russia. He went to Russia and he came back about fifteen or twenty years after, and I met him again. He said, now, I was thinking, he said, "I'm looking back at school." He said, "You know how dean the Dean Bossings taught us research, he didn't teach architecture, he taught us philosophy more than anything else. And I looked back at him, I could look back old Dean Bossange taught us the history of architecture, but mostly philosophy. APPEL: What was his name, Dean . . . SALERNI: Dean Bossange, B-O-S-S-A-N-G-E. APPEL: Bossange. SALERNI: Bossange. Yes. Born in France, raised in France, Bachelor of Philosophy from the Sorbonne, the premiere, the Ecole des Beaux Arts in Paris. Incidentally, I have a diploma from the Ecole des Beaux Arts, up there, the American branch. Part of your architecture training in design involves the system used in France, used to involve, if you finish their schedule, if you finished their schedule, you got the diploma, which is the fancy one of them. APPEL: Well, thank you. SALERNI: Anything more you want to know? APPEL: Well, one final question. Have you been back to Italy or stayed in touch with people? SALERNI: Unfortunately, no. I have been somewhat in touch with Italy. When my father died, he, he had left a procura to one of his nephews . . . APPEL: A procura . . . SALERNI: Procura is a power of attorney. Power of attorney to, to more or less manage the property. And, uh, the nephew died and, uh, his children weren't quite, Papa wasn't quite happy with them, so when Papa died I decide to send another power of attorney to my cousin Nicola. My cousin Nicola had served in the Guardia di Financia in Italy. The Guardia Financia is the same as our Internal Revenue Service. And I figure he had retired to the town, he would be an excellent man to manage the property. And I was going to go to see him, I was going to see him. However, five years ago my son Tommy went over to see him. He said he got along fine with him. My son Tommy speaks Italian like you, not quite as good as yours. He learned it in college, he learned it in college too. He got along fine, but he got along fine. He was in there three weeks and he got along beautifully, wants to go back gain. So one o these days he'll go back to, I wanted to go to last year, but my wife says my legs bother me and I'm not going to go with you if I can't walk. I said, "I'll put you in a wheelchair and wheel you around." She says, "No, no, you're not going to do anything like that." So who knows, maybe I'll go one of these days. That's my getting in touch with them now. Unfortunately, a year ago my cousin died and now we have a house, we have a lot of field in Italy, and they cannot get along, you know nobody there to manage them and I don't know a single person there that I can remember, you know, that I can remember when I was there, I have cousins, but I never met them. So, now, it's all dangling. So, so one of these maybe days I'll go over. I like my work here, otherwise I'd, I'd retire and let my sons, say, you run the office, go on, finish, but, uh, I still like to come here and do my little drawings. APPEL: Well, thank you very, very much. That was so interesting. SALERNI: Okay. You don't want to know about my experience at Yale and my experience at NYU and all of that . . . APPEL: Another time. SALERNI: Another time, okay. APPEL: This is the end of the interview with Guerino Salerni.