GUMB: This is Dana Gumb, and I'm speaking with Mrs. Anna Salvia on the 24th day of October, 1985. We're beginning this interview at 11:25, and we're about to interview Mrs. Salvia about her immigration experience from the Ukraine in the year 1923. Okay, um, Mrs. Salvia, if we could begin with where and when you were born? SALVIA: When I was born in Europe, it was January the 25th, 1908. But at that time it was Austria and, what else can I say? GUMB: Okay. Uh, what is it now? SALVIA: Oh, now it's Russia. Yes, yes, yes. GUMB: So, it's part of the Ukraine? SALVIA: It's Ukraine, but Russia took it over. GUMB: I see. Russia took it over. SALVIA: Yes, yes. GUMB: And when you were born there it was under Austria? SALVIA: It was Austria, yes. But after the First World War, uh, it sort of divided. They gave that part to Poland. Then it was Poland. But now it's Russia. Yes. GUMB: Okay. Um, uh, what kind of place did you grow up in? SALVIA: Aw, don't let me talk about it. It was the most beautiful place in the whole world, and I'm not exaggerating. I mean it. Carpathian mountains like you never saw in your life. You never saw anything like it. The flowers, the trees, we had blossoms near our home. I, you can't believe it, and the rivers and the trees, and the mountains, you can't believe it, it's like a lost, lost horizon. I mean it. It's really beautiful. GUMB: Was this a small town you were living in? SALVIA: We were peasants, you know what that is. Peasants, yes, yes. GUMB: What do you mean by that? SALVIA: We had, uh, there was nothing but farms. Everybody had their own farm, no one ever worked for anybody. You worked for yourself, and whatever you raised, this was yours, see. But we had a lot of land, a lot. And we worked hard, you know, in the summertime. And in the wintertime, you do other things. In the wintertime you go to the forests and you cut wood so you have firewood and all that stuff, you know, but it was beautiful, it was beautiful. I can never forget it. Never. GUMB: So you were living in the countryside? SALVIA: Real, real, real country. I never saw a train till I decided, till I was coming to America. I never saw a car till the war started, the First World War, when, that's when, because the, they had the Russians and the Ukrainians and the Germans, you know, moving back and forth, you know, wars, like that. And they had their own vehicles, so. That's when I saw a truck or a car. But otherwise I never saw a train till I was coming here and I was thirteen years old. We heard about it, but I didn't know what it looked like. Yes. GUMB: What kind of house did you live in? SALVIA: Oh, we had a nice house, beautiful house. Beautiful, just beautiful. My mother built a beautiful house for us. Beautiful. Just beautiful. All I can say. It was just beautiful. But it was different. You know, it was in Ukraine, you don't even see in the movies, because it was different, that's all I can say. I brag about it. I have a daughter, and she says to me, "Mother, that's so many years ago." I says, "I know, but it's in my heart yet." GUMB: Well, how was it different, can you elaborate? SALVIA: Well, for instance, what can I say, to you. I don't know. We had a beautiful farm, we raised our own vegetables. We had cows. We had horses, sheep, goats, chickens, anything you wanted, we had it. And we raised it, we never worked for anybody, and nobody ever worked for us. And, uh, that's the way we managed. We managed very nicely. GUMB: Did you go to school? SALVIA: Yes, but not for long, because when I started to go to school, that's when the First World War started. That was 1914. And, uh, so I went to school one year, and I was going to keep on going but, just, the government took over the schools for the soldiers, see. So they used the schools for their homes, you know, for sleeping and for whatever. They were barracks. So, uh, then I didn't go any more. And then when I started to go all over again, my mother sent us tickets that we should come to America, and all I had was one year of education and I want you to know, I never went to school in this country, but I can read, I can write, I can spell, I can speak. All by myself. After I was here six months, I promised myself, I was gonna learn how to speak English, and I did. I really did. All on my own. Because I, I like it like that. GUMB: Uh, this place that you came from, uh, what did you call it? SALVIA: We called it Stary Kosaw [ph]. Sounds strange to you. Of course, I know, Stary Kosaw [ph], that was the name of the village, Stary Kosaw [ph]. GUMB: Could you spell that? SALVIA: Oh, I can write it for you. GUMB: Okay. We'll write it afterwards. SALVIA: Stary Kosaw [ph]. I can write it, very simple. GUMB: Okay. And, uh, that was the name of the village. SALVIA: Yeah. The village I came from. That's right. And it's right near Roumania. Because from our house, we could walk to Roumania, but Roumania was under a different government, and you cannot go there. But from our house we could look. It's right near the Roumanian border. Beautiful, beautiful, beautiful. That's all I can say. It's beautiful. GUMB: Yeah. At that time, uh, when you were growing up there, what was the name of the region of the area, what was it called, do you remember? SALVIA: Well, Stary Kosaw [ph] was like the main city, you know? It, it was a town and it had, uh, courtrooms and jails and all that, but we never went there, except on special occasions, because we, you know, we lived our own lives. And besides, over there, no matter where you had to go, you walked. There was no ways of getting, there was no streetcars, no trains, you walked. If you wanted to go somewheres, even if you had to go for three days, you walked, see. And that's, that's why, we didn't go very much. But, uh, now and then. GUMB: All right. Um, so, um, uh, you said ,you said your mother, uh . . . SALVIA: My mother was here, see, because my father came here before my mother, and then my mother came here, because those days everybody was coming to America, to make money, so they can send back, or go back and live there. And over there, in my country where I came from, they had a saying, that if you go to America, it's a paradise. The streets are paved with gold. And everybody wanted to come to America because, you know, if somebody tells you something like that you want to go yourself, you see. Sure. It's easy living. So, I came here. But I looked for gold, and I did not see the gold, believe me. So, anyway, that's the way it goes. Ask me anything you want, I'll answer you, because I really don't know what to say. I have so much to say, but I don't know what to say. GUMB: Yeah, okay. You're fine. How old were you when your father came? SALVIA: To tell you the truth, my father left Europe six months before I was born. I never saw my father till I got to Ellis Island and they came to pick us up, my father and my brother. I mean, that's right. My mother came with my father to pick us up in Ellis Island, but I never saw him before. And, uh, and I knew very little of my mother, because she left 1914, and we came here 1923, and I forgot what my mother looked like. You know, she left me, I was a little kid. So when I came I saw them, I was disappointed because, you know, you, you have different ideas of your mother and your father, but that's the way it was, yes. GUMB: Why did your mother leave, uh . . . SALVIA: Europe? For the same reasons, like my father. Come here and make a lot of money and send it back to Europe, or go back and live in Europe. You know. Come here and make money, and then go back there. GUMB: Um, do you, she left in 1914, you said? SALVIA: Yes, right before the war started, right before the war started. Otherwise she never would have come here, because they wouldn't let you during the war. Yes. 1914. And then I remember, because I have a very good memory for my old age. I mean, I remember when my m went to America, in about two weeks, three weeks, the war started, the First World War, see. Because I remember. ( she laughs ) In Europe, we had no newspaper, we had no calendars, we had no clocks. We lived by the sun. Would you believe that? We could tell what time it was by the sun, and we could tell everything by the time. And, uh, one day the bells were ringing in church, and when the bells ring in church that means there is something happening someplace. So, I was a little bit of a kid and my sister said go to church and see what happened. So I went to church, and the man was ringing the bells, you know, they had beautiful, beautiful bells. It was a beautiful thing. And, uh, I said to him, "What happened?" He says, "War has started." I, we, we didn't even know what it meant, war. So I go home and I tell my sister war started, and that's, and then, and then we start to see the Russian soldiers and the German soldiers, Italian soldiers, and then we knew it was war. And then the cannons came and the shells came and they dug trenches and, oh, everything. Yeah. I remember the First World War like it was happened yesterday. GUMB: Before we get to that, uh, you were, your mother left in 1914. SALVIA: Yes. GUMB: And you were born in 1908. SALVIA: Yes. GUMB: So, do you remember her leaving, do you remember anything? SALVIA: Well, I remember. I remember, see, because I had an older sister, she was older than my brother and myself and, um, I heard them whisper something, you know how kids listen. So I heard them whispering, like, she was preparing to go someplace, my mother, to America, see? But she didn't want me to know because I was a baby, and she probably felt bad to leave me, you know, I don't have to tell you. But anyway, I know I got up one morning and the house felt very empty. Could you believe it? Very, very empty. And I knew something went wrong. But I wouldn't dare ask my sister, because she would know that I was listening at one time. So I just kept my mouth shut. But I was walking in the street, ( she coughs ) excuse me, and one woman said to me, uh, "Where is your mother?" So I says, "My mother went someplace. She'll be back soon." And then the woman said to me, "No, she's not gonna be back. She went to America." And that's how I knew that whatever I overheard in the house whispering between my mother and my sister, this was it. But, uh, that's the way it was, yes. GUMB: How, in whose care did your mother leave you? SALVIA: My sister. She was eighteen years old, and she was married, but her husband was drafted to go into the army, and she had a little child, so she raised us. My sister raised me and my brother. In fact, I love my sister. I used to send her packages, things from America, you know, and she used to send me things from Europe, but then she died. She died in 1965, so she's gone. But, she'd be old now. I'm old, so imagine how old she'd be. GUMB: Okay. Um, so, uh, in 1914 your mother left, and then . . . SALVIA: Yes. GUMB: You were talking about the war. SALVIA: Yes, yes, the war, from 1914, till it ended. Yes, yes, yes, it was bad, it was bad. Because a lot of times the, the village would be empty. Everybody ran away, everybody. Because they were afraid the Russians. They had a saying, but that's why I say never believe what you hear. They spread the news, that when the Russian soldiers come they rape the women and they kill the babies. So everybody ran away. But my sister, that's how I am today. My sister said, if we have to die, we're gonna die right here, and we're not going. And so we didn't go. We were the only ones left and, uh, shells would come from the bombs, you know, and rip somebody else's house, somebody else's roof, and would carry a piece of wood God knows where, or it would make a big hole that you could put tons and tons of dirt just to fill it up, but, uh, my sister said we gonna stay, and so we stayed. And then, that battle only lasted about three days, because they had to keep on going, you know. And, uh, then it stopped, and then the Russians came and they were the most wonderful, generous soldiers in the world. If I tell you something, you'll never believe it. We happened to have a nice house, and, uh, the soldiers, like, the captains, you know, the high ups, the higher ups, you know, they were the Cossacks, you know, they used to have those big, beautiful horses, with the big fur hats, you know. So they used, when they would come into the city, they would look for the nicest place where they could live. But if they came into your home, you had to let them take it over, you see. You could not say, well, this is mine, you can't take it. It was the law. So, anyway, this time, we had, the soldiers came, they looked, and they told us we gonna, they gonna come live in our house. So it was all right for us. But they looked around, after they stayed in the house for about a few days, and they saw we were hungry. So they, I never forget this, they came to me and they said to me, they want me . . . ( she is moved ) GUMB: That's okay. Go ahead. SALVIA: I have a habit of doing that. GUMB: You can do it here. That's all right. SALVIA: I don't have to do it. It's a bad habit, you know. But anyway, to make a long story short, they, uh, gave us a great big container and they told me where to go out in the fields, you know, when the army travels, the kitchen travels with them, but the Russians, they had food like you never saw food in all your life. Each soldiers got a loaf of bread like this, with a big piece of sugar like this, and they just take a knife and they cut the piece of sugar and they drink it with their tea. So I would go into the, where the kitchen was, and just mention the officer's name, and they would pile up that container to the top with the best food in the world, and this, they saved our lives, you know, would you believe it? Would you believe it? Otherwise we would have been real hungry. But then, when the Italian soldiers came they were starving. They had nothing to eat. In fact, we had a cat and one day an Italian soldier came to us and said could he borrow our cat because where he was living in the church, they took over the church and everything, they had mice. So he took our cat to catch the mice. And we didn't see our cat for a month. And my brother decided he was gonna investigate. He was a very bright kid. He's dead now. So he went there, and he went up to the attic, and he saw the skin of our cat. So they killed the cat and ate him. That's how hungry they were, see. When you're hungry, you're hungry, you know. And, uh, that's the way it goes. GUMB: What did the Russians feed you? SALVIA: They had everything. Anything you wanted, they had it. And they were very, very, we had a lot of fruit trees, you know, like apples and pears, but apples and pears like you never saw in all your life, because this happens to be a very, very good land. That's why Russia wants it. It's their breadbasket now, it's feeding them, see, yeah. Very good land, everything grows on it. You don't have to worry. It just grows. You know what he had? Not the kind of poppies that they take for dope, you know, but the poppy seeds that you use on rolls here, on bread? We raised it, and we never planted nothing, it just grow by itself. And we had, but we had fruit trees like you never saw in all your life. But when the Russians came ( she laughs ) you'll never, Mrs., I'm ashamed even to talk about it, but it happened. If I would go, I was like a little rabbit. I'd climb up in a tree and get anything they wanted, it didn't cost me anything, and they would give me jewels. They'd say to me, go get me a couple of apples, a couple of pears, and I'd get it for him, and they'd give me all kinds of rings and wristwatches, you know, because they took that from the rich people, see, and they knew we were poor, and that's the way it is. It's a long story, but I forever . . . I talk to my daughter about it all the time. She's tired of hearing it. She says, "Okay, Mother, go ahead." GUMB: Okay, so, um, you survived the war. SALVIA: Yes, yes. GUMB: Up to 1918. SALVIA: Yes. GUMB: And, uh, when, when did you finally come to this country? SALVIA: Well, uh, see, my brother, he was, he was a kind of a boy that could never stand stil. In fact, when the war was on, he wanted to go into the army, but he was only twelve years old. But he went and he told them he has to go to the army, because he was that type of person all his life. So they said to him, well, we can't take you to the army, you're just a little boy, but you can come with us and, you know, take care of the horses, and polish the officers' boots, and he traveled all over, he went to Italy, and God knows where, they took him. And then he came home. And then he wrote the letter to my mother, joking, that he'd like to come to America. And my mother and my father immediately sent us, uh, four tickets. That's for me, my brother, my sister and her little child. But my sister said, "You two go." She means me and my brother. But she says, "I'm gonna stay here because if I go that means I have to sell everything I have, everything we have. And in case something happens that they won't let us through, we'll come back to nothing." So she stayed home and we came, and it took us about four months to get here, because when we got to Warsaw, you know, you have to go there to get an American Consulate stamp, you know, and when we got there, the line would be so long, you'd go on the line like seven o'clock in the morning and you'd wait and you'd wait and, you know how things are, they, they don't rush. And then, all of a sudden, they'd say no more for today. And we stayed there for, I think, four weeks, waiting for that stamp. And then we were coming by Holland American lines, so we would have to go to Holland to get our ship. When we got to Holland, the Holland, the Rotterdam just left. So over there we had to wait till the ship went to New York, and then back to Holland again to get that ship. Yes. GUMB: You said your brother was joking when he sent that letter? SALVIA: Yes. He was joking. He was joking. We had no intention of coming to America. But he, he just said to my mother he'd like to come to America, but he was joking, joking. But my mother figured he meant it, and she right away sent us four tickets. GUMB: Why didn't he want to come to America? Was he just . . . SALVIA: Well, my brother was like a little, you know, he was different. Like I said to you, he joined the army, he wanted to go to joint he army and they said, "You're too young." He was that type, see. Like in the summertime he would go and work in the mountains taking care of the animals. Like here in America you send, if you can afford it, you send your children to camp, right. Over there we used to send our animals to camp for the summer because they had to be well-fed. So my brother used to take . . . Is it boring you? KIELTYKA: Not at all. GUMB: No. SALVIA: So my brother used to take that job. And he was a little kid. You go in the Carpathian Mountains, and you work, take care of the animals, and at the end of the season they would give you, no money, but maybe they'll give you like a barrel of butter, a barrel of cheese. But that's what he did. He's a real go-getter. GUMB: Now, you mentioned that you'd heard stories about America being paved with . . . SALVIA: Everybody . . . GUMB: Streets being paved . . . SALVIA: Everybody said that, you know. Everybody said, oh, you go to America you're gonna have everything. It's so beautiful. You never have to worry about nothing. So you know something? This I have to tell you. When the ship was passing, am I talking too much? GUMB: No. SALVIA: When the ship was passing, like, this was June, that I remember. When the ship was passing the Statue of Liberty, you know, the Holland American Line, because it was going to dock in Hoboken, and I saw the Statue of Liberty, I thought it was a religious monument, you know, so I started to bless myself, you know, because, you know, but then I discovered it was not a religious thing. Till this day, I said, imagine me blessing myself because I thought it was a religious statue, it was so big and beautiful. And then we docked, in Hoboken, and, uh, the tugboat comes, and they take you, they took us to Ellis Island. And over there they, you know, they took us some medication and everything, and we thought, you know, then they told us that they're gonna let our parents know when we get there, so my parents could pick us up, see. And they did, but after. You know, that takes time, there were thousands of people coming. I still laugh about it, you know. god. So my, uh, so after we were in Ellis Island a few days, they decided they're going to send us on the island, way, way, way out, you know. Past the Verazano Bridge, there's two islands there, so they're gonna send us there. But we didn't know nothing because they never, first of all, we, all the people on that boat spoke different language, you know, German, Hungarian, Polish, Russian. And those people that took care of us, they couldn't do that, they probably spoke English, you know. So, all of a sudden, from Ellis Island, the tugboat came, and they said, "You have to come." So we all go in that tugboat, they could have drowned us, we didn't know nothing. And they took us there and we stayed there for a long, long time. But in the meantime they sent a telegram to my parents in New Britain, Connecticut, to please come and claim your children, they're here. So my father and my mother, they went to Ellis Island, from New Britain, Connecticut, and they said, "Your children are not here." Can you imagine how parents must feel? That they're someplace else. So they said you go back home, and when they come back to Ellis Island we will notify you. So after we were there on the island for a long, long time, then they, all of a sudden, told us that we have to go in the tugboat and go to Ellis Island, and we got there, and they kept us there for quite some time because, it was a lot, millions of people going through. You know, you couldn't rush things. But they used to keep us locked up in Ellis Island. You didn't go in the grounds or nothing. They kept you in the one big room with the doors locked. And how we knew that those doors were locked, because they would permit a man to come and sell apples to the people, you know, because they fed you good, but this was probably a peddlar who had something to do with Ellis Island, and they let him in, and he'd sell us apples. I don't know how much, but my, we had money, because my mother used to send us money. And, uh, then, when he'd get through selling us apples he'd go out and they'd lock us up again. And that's where we were in that room, all day long. All locked up, like prisoners, I mean it. Till suppertime. Suppertime they take you in the dining room and they feed you and then you go to sleep. But, if I tell you how we slept, I know it was summertime, so, I don't know what people did in the wintertime. First of all, the bed was very thin, uh, well, I wouldn't know what to call it. It wasn't steel, but it wasn't hard, it was like a, a mesh, and you slept on there. No mattress, no pillow, no nothing. You slept with your clothes. And you slept like that. And in the morning the lights go on, you get up, you would go through the door, and they would leave you a piece of soap and a little paper towel, and you go and you get washed. And then you have your breakfast, and then you go back into that locked up room. And that's the way it was till my mother and my father came to call for us. But it just takes time, you know. They tell you, "Well, we're going to call your mother." They probably took their time. Five days. And that's how we stayed. GUMB: This is the end of side one. END OF SIDE ONE, TAPE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE GUMB: This is the beginning of Side Two. Okay, Mrs. Salvia, to go back to Europe for a minute, before you came to this country, uh, when you, uh, first of all, in the household there, uh, who was living, who was living together? SALVIA: My sister, her child, my brother and I. The four of us. Yes, yes, yes. GUMB: Okay. And when you got the letter from your mother, uh, from your parents, with the four tickets, how did you feel about coming here? SALVIA: I didn't want to come here. I didn't want to come here at all. I'm gonna tell you a story. I didn't want to come. I cried all the time when I knew that I was coming. Well, I had to come because they had the tickets. And, uh, and my brother was very strict with me, he used to hit me every minute on the minute, and, so I went. And then when we went to Warsaw, that's quite a trip from where I came from, from Stary Kosaw [ph], it's like two days' trip, you know, and we got there, and we had to wait about five weeks there before they would give us the American stamp that we're okay to go, you know. Because, like I said, the line would start in the morning, but they, they'd take their time about it, and four o'clock they'd say it's finished. Come back tomorrow. And this went on for five weeks. And my poor mother had to send us money to keep us alive there, you know. And, uh . . . GUMB: Why didn't you want to come? SALVIA: I didn't want to leave my country. My friends were there, I was born there. Everything was there, you know, and I had land. You see, my mother and my father, they divided our land, that each one of us got a certain amount. And I knew this was gonna be my home, my land, and I knew some day I'll get married and that land will be mine, you see. It's, this is, this was my home, this was where I, I loved it, I enjoyed it. GUMB: They gave land to daughters? SALVIA: Everybody. Everybody. Well, it just so happened that my father came from a very nice family, you see. That they had the land, and my mother came from a family where she had land. So they gave us, each one got a nice piece of land, but a nice piece, that you could live off of. In fact, when I was already in this country, my sister wrote me a letter, and she said would I mind if the piece of land that belongs to me I should give it to her. So I wrote her a letter immediately, I says, "Please take it, enjoy it, it's yours," you know. What was I gonna do with the land here? But that's the way it went. GUMB: Okay. So, how did you get from your, your village in the countryside, to Warsaw? SALVIA: First we walked maybe for twenty-four hours to get the train, where we had to get the train in another city, they call it Cola Maya [ph], that's way, way, way out. Everybody knows Cola Maya [ph], because that was the biggest city, see. And that's where we got the train to go to Warsaw. But from our house we walked, I think, night and day, to get there, to get that train. And that was the first time I ever saw a train, or I ever sat in one. And then we got to Warsaw and, I'll tell you a story. And then Warsaw, as I told you, we had to wait in that line from seven in the morning till four in the afternoon for five weeks, and I was disgusted. I wanted to go back home. I didn't want to go to America. But my brother wanted to go very badly, see. So, I was crying every single day.l I was telling him I don't wanna go, I don't wanna go. And he couldn't bring me back because, first of all, it took money and it took time and he has to wait in the line there for the stamp from the American Consulate, you know, and, um, there's no ways of me going back. But there was some Jewish man there, that he knew about Stary Kosaw, and he said to my brother, "I'm going there. I'll take her back if she wants to go." And I was so happy I was going home. So listen to this. then I get home, and all my friends started to tease me. They said, "What? You came back from America already?" And I wouldn't tell them that I just didn't want to go. So I was happy. Everything was fine. My sister was happy. I was happy. Her little child was happy. And about two weeks later my brother comes. We were surprised. We thought he was already in America, you know. My brother says you have to come with me because they will not let me go through, because my mother sent one passport for two people and they said to my brother, "How do we know you didn't murder her? She has to come or she, or you're not going." So he came and said to me, "You're coming." So I cried all night, I cried all night, and I kissed my daughter's little baby all night because I knew I was never gonna see her. I'm telling you, I'm still crying. And that's the way. So, so he took me back to Warsaw, and again we had to wait so long for that American stamp, to say that you're okay. In the meantime, they would take you through all kinds of examinations. You know something, believe me when I say. The way they examined us, everything, my brother said to me one day, "Gee, in America, everybody must be so healthy." And when we got off the boat we saw people crippled, we saw people with glasses. We couldn't understand why they was, they used to examine our eyes, you know, all the time. God forbid you should have a little spec in there. They push you to the other side, that means you're not going. That's how strict they were, very strict. Even on the boat, even in Ellis Island, a lot of people got separated like that. GUMB: Um, let's see, um, your, your brother, how old was he at this time? SALVIA: Well, I was thirteen, he was eighteen. Eighteen. That's the difference. Five years, because there was still another child in between, but it died. GUMB: Okay. All right. Uh, you mentioned how everybody had said the streets were paved with gold. SALVIA: Yes. GUMB: Do you remember meeting anyone who had been here, and was telling these stories? SALVIA: No. ( she laughs ) If anybody was here and they came back to Stary Kosaw, they looked so different to us because we had pink cheeks, you know, from the air. It's a, it's a different world. It's like a lost horizon, believe me when I say it. We had pink cheeks. My hair was blonde. Nice, buster brown, and I looked so beautiful. The skin was white and clean and, um, what were you saying? GUMB: What did people, you were about to say, people who came back . . . SALVIA: Oh, yeah. So when the people . . . GUMB: What did they look like? SALVIA: Oh, my God. My sister would go, like, my mother would write my sister a letter that such and such a person is coming to visit somebody else there, would my sister go and visit them to see, you know. So my sister would want to go, and ask how my mother is, my father. And when my sister would come home she'd say, aaaah, oh, they'd look like they're skeletons, they'd look like they were dead and they came from the dead. Because they had no color, no red cheeks, no nothing, see. That's what it is. Yes. GUMB: But still there were these stories about the streets being paved with gold, or did that . . . SALVIA: Well, that was a rumor, see. It was a rumor. But when those people came they certain didn't look like they came from a place where the streets were paved with gold. But that's why everybody came to America, because they said you go to America you're gonna make a lot of money and everything is so beautiful. But let me tell you something, when we passed Ellis Island, no, uh, the Statue of Liberty, and I told you I was blessing myself because I thought it was, you know, ah, some kind of a religious thing, and I saw the smog and everything, and I said to myself, oh, this is America, you know, and then when my mother and my father picked us up in Ellis Island, they took us to a hotel, that hotel is still on Broadway, till this day they call it the Brevot or something like that, I passed it the other day and looked. I said, "Yeah, that's it." And I think it's on 29th Street on Broadway. You can't miss it. We, my mother took us there. And then, the hotel was clean, the room was clean and everything. And the next day my mother took me shopping, dressed me up, and my father took my brother shopping. But everywheres we went, I didn't like nothing, I didn't like nothing. The streets I didn't like, the people I didn't like, nothing. I just wanted to go back to Europe. But then my mother and my father took us to New Britain, Connecticut. Well, over there it was all factories, all smoke and all that. I still couldn't. Then we went to my mother's house and she had plain wooden floors and she used to go on her knees and scrub it with a brush, and I used to do that. But I still didn't see the gold streets, and that's how it happened. Yes. GUMB: But what did your mother do to try to make you adjust more easily? SALVIA: My mother didn't care too much because, you see, we were separated too long. When my mother went to America, that was 1914, so I was six years old, right? So that was that. So when she saw me again, I was already a big girl, you know. From four to thirteen that's a big change. But there was no more love. There was no love. No love of any kind. And then I know my mother preferred my brother, because I remember one day we were walking on the street in New Britain, Connecticut. This I remember because I was hurt very badly. And some lady that worked in the factory with my mother, she knew that my mother was bringing her kids here. So this lady said, "Oh, is this your child?" And my mother said, "Two of my kids came here, her and my son. But my son doesn't look like her." See? And I was nice. "My son does not resemble her, my son resembles my daughter in Europe." But my brother did not resemble my brother, my sister in Europe at all. And I was so hurt to think that my mother degraded me, and she built my brother up, see. So she had no, no love for me whatsoever. It was probably just because my brother wanted to come, but she loved my brother because, see, right away he got a job in the factory, and, uh, I was supposed to go to school, but it was summertime and the schools were closed, you know, June, July. So my brother would have to get up early in the morning to go to work. My mother used to wake me up. She used to say, "George is up. You get up." For nothing. And then, then my, my brother wanted me to go to school because he was working and he would, you know, give something towards the house. But my mother, no, she wanted me to go out and work. And I know that she signed a paper that I was supposed to go to school, see? But she sent me to Pennsylvania, Lark Haven, Pennsylvania. It's way, way out in no man's land. I couldn't speak English, I couldn't do nothing. But she told me to read the Ukrainian paper and see there's a job for me. And there was a job. Somebody wanted a young girl to take care of the children. So I read that for my mother and I wrote those people a letter, you know, in Ukrainian, because whatever I knew, I knew enough. And they sent money right away for me to come there. And would you believe it, I'll tell you this, I don't know how I survived. I really don't know. From New Britain, Connecticut you had to go to Grand Central Station, you know, because that's the connection, but to go to Pennsylvania you had to go to Pennsylvania Station, you understand what I mean? So all I had was a little slip of paper, because I couldn't tell them I want to go so and so and so. So I would get off the train, but I'll tell you something, this you'll never believe, the most beautiful thing. Must have been Children's Aid at that time, I don't think they have it any more. They must have watched for me. Maybe on the train the conductor must have called them up, got in touch with them, and when I got off at Grand Central they said to me, somebody came to me, and they said to me, "Is your name Anna Bohatchuk?" And I says, "Yes." And they said, "Come with us. We're gonna take you." They could have kidnapped me and killed me, who cares, you know. And they took me, took, put me in a cab, they asked me if I had money and I said, "Yeah, I have money." They put me in a cab and they sent me to Pennsylvania Station. And at Pennsylvania Station, another person came to me and they said, "Is your name Anna Bohatchuk?" And I says, "Yes." They said, "Well, come with us, we're gonna take you to your train." So they put me on the train, and I had to change in Philadelphia, the way I picture it today, you know, because Lark Haven was way, way, out and, uh, and they must have took me off the train, put me in the ladies room, because I remember a lot of women talking to me, you know, and I was crying because I couldn't speak English, but they all spoke in Polish, Ukrainian. And I listened and I answered them. But this, this one beats, so, later on they put me on a train again and I rode all night. And then when I woke up, I fell asleep. When I woke up, I saw the sun shining and the conductor came to me and he says to me, "Next stop you get off." That was Lark Haven. So, anything they told me to do, I did, no? I'm telling you. So I get off at the station, and a man approaches me. This was all from Children's Aid or Travel Aid or something. They had it those days. And this man says to me, "Is your name Anna Bohatchuk?" And I says, "Yes." And he says to me, "I'm gonna take you to the place where you're going." But he says, "Today's Sunday, it's too early to go." Because it was like eight o'clock in the morning. He says, "But I'm gonna take you to my house and you stay there till it gets a little later, you know, and then I'll take you. So I went to his house, imagine, if it was today, what would have happened. So I went to his house, his wife asked me if I wanted to eat something. Me, eat? No, I was bashful. And I sat there and I sat there and I sat there and then he said, "Okay, now I'm gonna take you to where you're going." So we kept on walking, kept on walking, this you'll never believe it. And we're walking, and it's Sunday, and then we see a man walking with two little girls and this man with me, he says, "Would you tell me where such and such a party is?" The name was Schuller [ph]. I remember. Sixty years ago, but I remember. So, so this man, with two little kids, he says, "Yeah, she's coming to work for us. We're going to church. But then he turned back and he took me home to his house and I stayed there six months. And in six months I learned how to speak English, and again, this, you don't believe it because it's like, it's like a fairy story, but this is true, it happened to me. Then, uh, they were not satisfied with me because they were giving me fifteen dollars a month, but they didn't think I was worth it. First of all I knew nothing about doing things in American, because in Europe it was a different style, and the kids didn't like me at all, and I didn't like them, so they decided they're gonna send me back home. So, after six months they said, "Anna, you're gonna go back home." I said, "Good." I didn't care. So when I got into the train, I was so bashful that I thought I was gonna stand all the way from Lark Haven to New York because I didn't want to bother anybody to sit next to them, you know, so I shouldn't impose on them. People would say, "Please sit down." I said, "No, I'll stand, I'll stand." But somehow or other they pushed me down. And when I got off at Pennsylvania Station, there were people waiting for me and they sent me to Grand Central and this, this is the payoff, when I got off at New Britain, Connecticut, listen to this. It's dark, and you laughing? ( she laughs ) I mean, is this strange? But I'm not making up this story. But tell me to stop when you want me to stop. GUMB: Okay, well, just, so you got back to New Britain. SALVIA: Yeah. But, when I got off the train, two people came to me and they said to me, "Is your name Anna Bohatchuk?" And I says, "Yes." And they said, "We're here to take you home." So I figured, well, my mother must have sent them, friends, you know, with a car. And when I get home my mother says to me, "How did you get here?" Because to walk from the train it's far. So I says, "The people you sent for me, they brought me home." My mother says, "We never sent anybody for you. We didn't even know you were coming." But this was Travel Aid. GUMB: The Traveler's Aid, yeah. SALVIA: Would you believe it? GUMB: Yeah, that's nice, yeah. SALVIA: Would you believe it? If they still in business now I'll give twenty-five dollars for being so good to me when I was a little kid. GUMB: Great. Well, if we could go back to Europe and, what do you remember about the voyage, the voyage coming over? SALVIA: Oh, yes, I remember, I remember. When we got to the ship, as I told you before, we missed the boat, because the boat left for America and we had to wait till it came back from America, and so, because we had to go by Rotterdam, Holland America, see, this is, the tickets were for that ship. So, uh, when the ship came back, they took us on the ship and everything's nice, but I was very, very sick, very seasick. My brother was upstairs where he had a porthole, but the women were in the steerage, and you don't know what steerage is like. The ceiling is about this high, beds one on top of another, and they put some kind of a ciander in that smelled so horrible. No windows, no nothing, and there you were . . . GUMB: A kind of what? SALVIA: They put ciander to take away the bad odor. GUMB: Oh, a scent. SALVIA: Yeah. You know what ciander is, you buy it, you know what it is. And they used ciander all over the ship. And there were hundreds of women, young ones, old ones, you know. And this was where we slept. And during the day, they would make you go up on the deck, and it rained one time like nobody's business, but they had to clean up the place, so they'd push you up there. My brother had a nice place, nice room, with a porthole and everything. But the women were down in the steerage. GUMB: Why were the women down there. Why . . . SALVIA: I don't know. I don't know. But my mother wouldn't believe it. She sent us a ticket to come to America, you know, the right way. So my brother had a nice room with a porthole and everything. And the women, there were hundreds of us, and the beds were one on top of another, you know? GUMB: So they were the same tickets, your brother and you? SALVIA: Yeah, the same identical thing. But I guess, he was a man, so they put him in his compartment. GUMB: Yeah, do you remember what, what kind of food you had on the ship? SALVIA: Oh, good food, but who could eat, you were seasick, very seasick. I was very sick. I never ate nothing, except, uh, uh, the girls that were with me, you know, I didn't know them, but they were passengers, but everybody tried to help one another. They had lemons, so they would give me a little piece of lemon to suck on so the nauseousness would go away, because you were so nauseous, you're so nauseous. And, uh . . . GUMB: Okay. So when, when you go to, uh, well, the boat docked in Hoboken, and, uh, do you remember what happened after the boat docked in Hoboken? SALVIA: Yeah, they kept us on a boat for about two, three days before they removed us to Ellis Island. Yes, yes. And they fed us there and, uh . . . GUMB: Was there an explanation of why they were doing this? SALVIA: No. No one told you anything. No one. Nobody ever said anything, no. Just like riding on the D Train. The stops. Nobody says nothing. GUMB: So, do you remember how you got from the boat to Ellis Island? SALVIA: Yeah, a tugboat came and took us, because I remember how I was afraid that I shouldn't fall in the water, you know. Yes, the tugboat came and took us to Ellis Island, yes. GUMB: All right. Once you got there, what was the first thing that happened? SALVIA: In Ellis Island? GUMB: Yeah. SALVIA: The first thing they do is, everybody goes, follows one another. They tell you follow one another, and then we went to, I suppose, someplace where they look at your passport. Everybody looked at your passport, you know. And we really should have been preferred because we were coming to our parents, but the other people were just coming to their brothers and their sisters, but everybody had a sponsor. You had to have somebody here, otherwise you couldn't come in. And, uh, so, so we got there, and after they fed us, it was nighttime, we went to sleep, and then the next day they locked us up in that little rom, maybe fifty or a hundred of us in that little room, I'm telling you. And the doors were locked, you could not escape. And I think those rooms are still there because I was there last summer, and I looked up, it looked so familiar, you know. Yeah, it really did. GUMB: What were you carrying? What were your possession? Do you remember what you, what you took? SALVIA: Not much, not much. Because we knew that what we had we could not wear it here, no. Just what we had on our backs. Well, we must have had a little something, but nothing. Because, first of all, we were dressing different in Ukraine, see. And that stuff would never be good here. But before we left Europe my sister had a little suit made for me, because she knew that I couldn't go, you know, with what we had. So she made a little suit, yeah, that I remember. But that's all we had. GUMB: Do you remember any prize possessions, or any . . . SALVIA: Nothing. Nothing, nothing, nothing. Nothing at all. Nothing. GUMB: You talked a little bit about the medical examinations on Ellis Island. Do you remember . . . SALVIA: Oh, yeah. They examine you all the time. They look in your eyes, they looked to see if you have bugs, God forbid you should have a bug, you know, or anything. In fact, they would look on your collar to see how clean it was and everything because when we were on that little island where I told you, near the Verazano Bridge, you know, Verazano Bridge wasn't there but, I mean, the little islands out there. They used to examine us over there every single day. So one day my brother insulted me. He said, "You're not gonna pass your test." And I was so determined to show him that I could do everything. So every morning I would go in a barracks and take a shower and scrub myself and wash my hair. And him, they found a little spot on his collar, and they didn't pass him right away, you see. He had to wait for the next day. So I didn't, I didn't want to say to him, you see? But that's what happened. GUMB: What do you mean, they would examine you every day? SALVIA: Yeah, yes, yes. Because if they weren't satisfied they'd send you right back, because in Ellis Island, see, on the ship, on the boat coming over, I made friends with two girls. I don't know, some, they were going to Chicago or Detroit or something like that. But when we got to Ellis Island, they were examining us again. So if you passed it you would go this way. If you didn't pass it, you went that way. And I remember how these girls were being examined. So one went this way, and one had to go that way. That I remember. That meant one didn't pass, so they send you right back to Europe. That was sad because, you know, to come way out here and then go back there. It's not the easiest thing to live through. GUMB: How long did you stay on Ellis Island the first time? SALVIA: About five days, five days. GUMB: Before you were sent to the . . . SALVIA: Yes. Because, you see, when they brought us to Ellis Island and they don't just rush things like, you can push this thing around, you know. It takes days and days and days. So, uh . . . GUMB: Did you get an explanation as to why you were being sent? SALVIA: Nobody ever said anything. Nobody. Nobody. Because, first of all, look, they, they don't speak Ukrainian or German or whatever. They only spoke English. So everything was in motions, but we were used to it in motions, you know, because that's the way it is. You know, when I, ( she laughs ) when I see how all the European dignitaries, how they speak English, and then I tell my daughter, I says, "Reagan can't speak those languages. And those people, you see, Egyptians, they speak English, the Russians speak English, everybody speaks English. But, because they're trained to do that. You have. GUMB: I think you said a little something about the food on Ellis Island, uh, what you remember getting . . . SALVIA: Oh, good, oh, good food. When you get up in the morning, I told you, they give you a piece of soap and a little piece of paper, and you go and wash yourself, and then you go in a line, you go and eat. And the dining room is tremendous and the big, big tables and they always had floodlights on us, I don't know why, but they always had big floodlights. But, as you pass through the door, every person would get a nice piece, a loaf of bread, and I'm a bread eater. And that bread was the most delicious. But this was your bread. And then, at the table, they give you beautiful food. I don't remember what. I don't remember, but we ate everything, because we were hungry. GUMB: Do you remember any of the unusual food? SALVIA: No. Bread, I remember, they gave us bread. GUMB: Things for the first time? SALVIA: No. I don't remember anything. No, no. That I don't remember because, you know, you just have to do everything they told you, you know, like, uh, I don't know how to express myself, but, uh, people did what they were told to do. You wait in the line, then you went to sit down and they gave you food. And whatever they gave you you ate, because that's what they gave it to you. And if you didn't eat you'd be hungry. GUMB: Yeah. But when you, on those other, those two, you were staying on one of those small islands . . . SALVIA: Yes, yes, yes. GUMB: How was that different from Ellis Island? What was different about it? SALVIA: Well, it was wide open, and you were free to roam on the island, because you couldn't escape, how could you swim? You couldn't swim from that island to Coney Island or to New York, you know? So they weren't afraid. You didn't escape. And that was the first time I ever saw a Black woman, on that island. Would you believe it? And I said to my brother, "George, I saw a lady, she's different than us." And I would go around her and look at her, you know. I'll bet you she was embarrassed, so she wanted to kill me. I was ashamed myself, but I never saw a black person before, you know. My whole life story. GUMB: This is the end of side two, tape one. Continued on tape two. END OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE ONE, TAPE TWO GUMB: Okay. This is tape two of the interview with Anna Salvia on October 24, 1985. The interview master number is 062, and we're beginning this interview, we're beginning this tape two, at 12:30. Okay, Mrs. Salvia, we were talking about . . . SALVIA: Call me Anna. GUMB: Okay, thank you, Anna. We were talking about the two small islands off Staten Island where you stayed. And how long were you there? SALVIA: Five days, maybe more. I don't know, but a long, long time. But they fed us very well, and we had beds. Real, with mattresses and pillows, very clean. We took a shower every single day. And they examined us all the time. GUMB: This was the small island out on Staten, off Staten Island. SALVIA: Yes, yes, yes, yes. GUMB: But you mentioned the bed that was just springs. SALVIA: That was in Ellis Island because, you know, a lot of people still had bugs, and if they would have mattresses and pillows, the bugs would go on the pillow and the mattress, so what they're gonna do with it, so they made sure you had no pillow and no mattress. But the mat, but the spring was mesh, very, very fine. And then, see, we're used to that, in Europe, because in Europe, we didn't have no mattresses. We slept on straw. So this was nothing bad for us. We, we didn't even feel uncomfortable. Yes. GUMB: You were talking about seeing a black woman for the first time. SALVIA: Yes, yes. The first time on that island, whatever island it was, I don't know, I saw a black woman, and I never saw anything like it before. So I called my brother, and I said to my brother, "Look, you'll see something there that you never saw before." So he says to me, "I saw her before." He saw her there, see. But, yes. And I looked, I walked all around her. And I hope she forgave me, because I meant no harm, but, it was like, I don't, like, I don't know how to say it, you know? We, something you never saw before, that's what it was. But, uh, she was there probably for the same reason, maybe from Ellis Island, what did we know, we don't know. GUMB: Oh, she was an immigrant. SALVIA: Yes, yes. Definitely. She was somebody there, but she didn't bother with nobody. She used to sit near the water. Because it's a beautiful island, beautiful. Big, big, they had barracks and barracks and barracks made. You know what they should do with that island now? They should put people with AIDS there. I really mean it. I mean it. It's an idea. And let them stay there. What's wrong? Two big islands. GUMB: Uh, anyway, the, uh . . . ( he laughs ) SALVIA: What are you laughing about? And what are you laughing about? Are you laughing at me? SALVIA: Oh, it's sort of a . . . ( break in tape ) GUMB: Okay. We were talking about the, uh, those little islands off at Staten Island. You said there were barracks there? SALVIA: Oh, a lot of them, a lot of them, because I didn't know what they used it for. Well, at that time, they used it for immigrants. But otherwise they must have used it for something else. But very good barracks, I mean, well kept. But this was summertime, so we don't know how the heat would be in the wintertime, but it was beautiful. And we were right in the middle of the bay. Where could it be more beautiful than that? And then, this was summertime. How I know that that was the island, because we could see Coney Island from that time, from there. And I didn't know what Coney Island was. But later on, you know, when I started to go to Coney Island, and then I said, oh, this is what we saw from the island. And now that they built Verazano Bridge, when I go to Atlantic City, I see those islands and I says, oh, those were the islands that I used to see Coney Island from, and those are the islands that I was on. So, this was many years ago. But the island is still there, it's the same size. GUMB: What did you see of Coney Island? SALVIA: Well, the Wonder Wheel and all that, all the time, yes. In the nighttime, you know, in the nighttime. Don't forget, that little island is out in the baby, and there are no lights there, and Coney Island is all lit up and you could see, you know, yes, yes. GUMB: What were the other people on those islands? What, when you were there, what sort of people? What sort of other people were there? SALVIA: The same, uh, people like there were on the boat. All nationalities, German, Ukrainian, Russian, Slavish, yeah, all kinds. GUMB: Were there any sick people, people who looked like they had medical problems? SALVIA: I don't know. I think, the sick people, they got rid of in a hurry. Oh, no. There was no sickness. When we were coming here, like I told you before, we thought this was the most, a country that nobody was ever sick. And when we saw people with glasses! My brother even said to me, "Look all the people with glasses." And they were so fussy about us, examined our eyes every single day, putting drops in there and looking in. But that was their rules and regulations, you know. They had to, they had to get that stamp of approval, that's what it was. GUMB: This time that you spent there on Ellis Island, and on the island off Staten Island, how did you, how did you occupy the time? Were there any activities, or anything you could do? SALVIA: No, nothing, nothing. Especially on Ellis Island, they lock you up in that room, God knows how many people. There was no such a thing as, so, you talked to other people, and then you waited, waited, waited. But, it's a funny thing. Uh, one day, somebody came and they told us that they may have to let us go because maybe our mother or father was gonna pick us up, they told us. But my brother took all the directions because, you know, he was older and he was a traveler, you know. I was a little kid. You don't know what it's like to be a little peasant. If you never saw a trolley car before, you never saw a train, you could just imagine, you know? It's like a lost horizon. So, what was I saying, I don't know? Yes, yes. See, so, uh, this day, they told my brother that somebody is gonna pick us up. And my brother went to look through the keyhole and he could see, in another room, my mother and my father. So he recognized my mother, and he said, "My mother is there, and a man must be our father." Because my brother, look, my father went to America before I was born, six weeks, months, before I was born. So he never saw me. And my brother must have been a little kid. So my brother said, he recognized my mother immediately, but my father, he couldn't, but he says, "This man must be our father." And then they came later on. They opened up their doors and they let us out. But I didn't want to see my mother, I didn't want to see my father. I wanted my Europe, my sister. Because this was where my life was. And, uh,t hey took us to the hotel and they bathed us. We were clean, because over there they kept us clean and, uh, bought us clothes and took us to New Britain, Connecticut, and that was it. GUMB: Yeah. While you were on Ellis Island, do you remember any, uh, interpreters, or anybody helping you at all? SALVIA: No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. They fed you. They locked you up, and then you had to wait until the people, we weren't the only ones. In that room, all day long, there must have been seventy-five other people, men and women, waiting for somebody to come, maybe somebody from Chicago or Detroit, you know, come and pick them up. Because they won't let you go unless somebody picked you up, see. GUMB: You mentioned that somebody came and talked to your brother and told him that your parents had come. SALVIA: Yes. GUMB: How did they communicate with him? Do you remember? SALVIA: Well, maybe they spoke a little Ukrainian. You know, they must have said something. Or, you'd be surprised, you know. When you come from a country like that, motions speak louder than words, you know. A lot of things out, they motion, like, they'll say, come on, you know. They don't have to say come on, they just say come on, you know, go like this. And so you'll follow them, you know. That's the way it is, like go ahead. GUMB: Do you remember if, if your brother or you had to change money on Ellis Island? SALVIA: My brother had money, yes. Because my mother used to send us money all the time, and he was the one who took care of it. Because if we wanted apples in Ellis Island in that room, he used to pay for it. And, in fact, when we were coming to, um, from our Stary Kosaw to Warsaw, on the train, they used to sell sodas, see. So he had the money to buy soda and all that, you know. GUMB: But when he arrived on Ellis Island, did, your brother, did he have American money or European money? SALVIA: That I don't know, that I don't know. GUMB: I wonder if he had to change it, you know, change . . . SALVIA: Maybe they changed it, but I don't know. Because if he paid the man for the apples he must have had some kind of money. But he took care of the money part, yes. Well, he was old, then, he was like the man of the world. GUMB: Do you remember buying anything else on Ellis Island other than the apples? SALVIA: No, just the apples. Nothing else. Nothing else. There was no ways of buying it, because they wouldn't let you go out. You were in this little room, locked up with a key. Even if you wanted to go out for a little walk you couldn't, because maybe they were afraid you'd escape or something, you know. How would they know that somebody wasn't waiting with a boat, a rowboat outside to pick you up, you know? Because when the ship was docked in, uh, Hoboken, a lot of people that had people on that boat coming, they knew they were there, but they had no ways of getting them down. But they used to come with a tugboat, you know. I guess they used to hire a tugboat and bring a lot of fruits and a lot of everything and throw it up for people to catch it, you know. And people caught it, apples, bananas, fruits and all those things, yes. GUMB: Who would throw this? SALVIA: The people with a boat that would come. Let's say you were on a boat, and I came, I knew you were there, but I had no ways of getting you off, right? So I figured I'll go to the boat, maybe I'll see you at least wave at me. So, in the meantime, they'd probably hire a tugboat and, but they would bring a lot of fruit. They figured, well, we can't go up in a boat, so at least throw them some fruit. But they bought barrels of fruit, and they would just keep throwing it to the people. Whoever caught it kept it. GUMB: These were relatives . . . SALVIA: Relatives of the other people, sure, sure. GUMB: Oh, I see. SALVIA: Yes, yes. GUMB: You remember seeing that? SALVIA: Oh, sure, sure. GUMB: That must have been quite a scene. SALVIA: Yes, yes. But, you know, when you have a life like that, uh, it's nothing new, you know? You're used to suffering, you're used to pain, you're used to everything. It's different, it's different, you know. It's just not like here, you know, you have a baby, and the baby's cuddled and everything, we never had that. In fact, when I was a little baby, my because used to tell this to me in Connecticut. My mother had to go work in the fields before she went to America, and she would leave me with my brother. And if I would be crying he used to throw water in my eyes. I would be in the crib, crying, and he'd take water, throw it in my eyes, and this way I'd be rubbing my eyes, and I'd forget crying. So this is the way we were raised. Yes. All the, you know, this here, people here, in this country, they have a feast. You see kids running, they have money, they have everything. GUMB: Why was he so mean? SALVIA: Well, he was a little mean, he was a little mean. My brother was mean, I'll tell you, he was. He was a cold tomato. My brother was so wealthy. I mean, he made his own money, and his wife and all that. But, when my mother died, let her rest in peace, she left five hundred dollars for me, five hundred dollars for my brother, five hundred dollars for my sister in Europe. That miserable man, he's dead already, but he never gave my sister her five hundred, he never gave me my five hundred. He kept it. In fact, last year his daughter came to visit me, and I never told this to her, but we were sitting eating, you know, and I said to her, Anna, you know, I says, your father was a mean man. Because, see, my brother, all he wanted to do things that everybody should say, oh, George Bohatchuk was a wonderful man, see. I don't live that way, never did. This was his ways, you know. In fact, he once made, he was very handy, very handy. He could do anything. This was his nature. He made a beautiful cross in the church in New Britain, Connecticut. And I said to him, George, you made that cross for the church, and I said, for me you couldn't even make a little frame. And he says, but Anna, that cross is gonna be there forever. But then later on he got soft, and he made me quite a few beautiful things we still have, so I have some memory, because he was just a handyman. He was like a genius, you know. GUMB: You mentioned seeing the Statue of Liberty in the harbor. Had you ever heard of it in the old country? SALVIA: No. That's what, I thought, I thought it was, you know, in Europe people are very religious. Not now, any more, but those days. Because no matter where you walked out in the street, they used to have a little, uh, place, you know, for religious, you know, I don't know how to say it, but a little stand with, uh, some, the Virgin Mary, or something else like that. So when I saw the Statue of Liberty, I said, oh, my God, and I started to bless myself, you know. That's right. What it was, another statue, religious statue. Because she does look religious, you know, standing like that, you know, right? And with that crown on her head. It's gonna be beautiful when it's open next year. GUMB: Um, uh, let's see, uh, were there any customs or, that you brought from the, uh, from the old country that your family continued to, uh, to do, like at Christmastime? SALVIA: Oh, sure, sure. Till this day I still keep, my Christmas is January the 7th. I go to the East Side, no 7th Street, because Ukrainian people live there, you know, this is a Ukrainian block. And I go there and I buy a lot of, uh, Ukrainian delicacies, that only that place sells it. And I, oh, yes, I keep my Christmas all the time, yes, yes. I do. I keep both Christmases, yes. GUMB: Okay. Uh, why is it January 7th? SALVIA: Because Greek Orthodox, you see? GUMB: The Eastern church. SALVIA: Yes. The Roman Catholic is like my daughter is, because my husband is Italian, so she's Roman Catholic. I go to the Roman Catholic church because in, in my neighborhood there are no Ukrainian churches, and I'm not gonna go to 7th Street on Third Avenue just to go to church on Sunday, but I go once in a while. Oh, yes. GUMB: Okay. Um, we'll talk a little bit about becoming a citizen. Uh, when did, when could you finally become, when did you become a citizen? SALVIA: Oh, a long time ago, long, long time ago. And, then, my husband was born here, so my husband is a Brooklynite, so you originally become an American citizen. Oh, sure, sure. GUMB: Did you have to take, go through some special program or anything to become a citizen? SALVIA: Yes, yes, yes, yes. But I had a man, a lawyer, he took care of everything for me. All, I just had to go and swear in. GUMB: How did it, how did it feel becoming a citizen? Did it feel like you were closing a door? SALVIA: No, no. No, no. Because, uh, I get adjusted to everything, see. I'm the kind of person that gets adjusted. You know why? In Europe, they break you in. That when they say, "You touch this, but you don't touch that." And you just live by that. Yes. GUMB: Okay. Couple more questions. SALVIA: Yeah. Go ahead, go ahead. I'm getting my glasses out in case you want me to spell my, uh, maiden name. Sure, but, uh . . . GUMB: Yeah, there's some things we're going to need to know how to spell, yeah. SALVIA: Without my glasses I don't see. GUMB: Did you, um, were there any, did your name change at all? Uh, uh, did you have any problem on Ellis Island with your name? SALVIA: No, my name was Bohatchuk. No, no problem at all. It was my father's name, my mother's name, and we used it. GUMB: Uh, once you were here for, how long did it take before you felt, uh, at home? SALVIA: When I hit New York. After I came home from Pennsylvania, like I told you, I was in Pennsylvania for six months, then my mother was looking for another job for me in New York, see? Because my mother felt bad that my brother would have to work and I didn't have to work, so she wanted, so she went to New York and she got me a job taking care of a man, this man was a widower, he had two little kids, and he also had a restaurant. So, my mother got me that job, I think he was giving me like twenty-five dollars a month. I should take care of his kids, you know, keep them clean and everything, and try and keep the house clean. But he never said anything about me working in his restaurant. So in the morning I would dress the kids, send them to school, and then I would go into his restaurant and wash pots and pans all day long. And there was a lady that lived in the same building, she saw how hard I worked. She says to me, "Anna, I'm not gonna let you do that. I'm gonna take you to an office, and I'm gonna get you a nice job." So, she made me quit him, and she took me to an office, and she got me a job taking care of kids. If you know anything about the East Side, Avenue C on 8th Street, this man was a pharmacist, and he wanted somebody to take care of his kids, and that's how I, and that's how I learned to live in New York. And then I got friends, I was already fifteen years old, I got boyfriends. And I've been on my own ever since. GUMB: Uh, what, how did you, uh, why did this woman take an interest in you? SALVIA: I don't know. It was like Godsend. Because, you know something, what's your name? GUMB: Dana. SALVIA: Dana, right. Oh, what a beautiful name. All right. This woman, she felt sorry for me, how I used to work so hard. This man used to make me scrub pots and pans in a restaurant all day long. I was a little kid, just a little kid, fifteen years old. But here you see a girl fifteen, she's that big. And he made me work so hard, so this lady said to me, "Anna, I'm not gonna let him do that to you." So, she took me out of there, and she got me this little job taking care of these two little kids, and that's how I got used to being on my own. And then I worked in the Automat for years and years and years. Yes. GUMB: You began to feel at home because . . . SALVIA: Oh, yes, yes. I made boyfriends, I made girlfriends. I had a good time and, oh, yes, yes. And then I didn't want to go back to Europe. No, no, no, no. I liked it here. GUMB: Okay. SALVIA: And, uh, when I got a telegram that my mother died, I said to these people, I was living with them, I says my mother didn't die. See, my brother always told me that I was a bad girl and somehow or other, he used to write me letters when I lived in New York, that somehow or other he was gonna put me in a home for the bad girls. So when I got this telegram that my mother died, I said to these people, "My mother didn't die." I says, "My brother's gonna put me in a home." So these people said to me, "Anna, you're not doing anything. You're working, you're working for us, you're not doing anything wrong. Why would he want to put you in a home?" I says, "Well, he told me that I was a bad girl, and he's gonna put me in a home." So they said, "Anna, you go. You go home. If your mother is dead, you stay there till it's all over, you know." ( she coughs ) Excuse me. "And if you're not back in three days we're gonna come out there and see what happened." So, my mother died. They buried her. And I came back, and that was that. There was no tears, no nothing. And when my brother died there were no tears ever, because he was never close to me, never. GUMB: This is the end of the interview with Mrs. Anna Salvia, the end of tape two, side one.