HARTMAN: This is Judith Hartman and I'm speaking with Jeanne Bisignano on Tuesday, June 17, 1986. We're beginning our interview at 10:10 a.m. We are about to interview Jeanne about her immigration experience from Holland in 1920. Jeanne, we're interested in finding out about where you were born in Holland, and when, and what life was like there. Can you remember? What can you remember? BISIGNANO: I can remember quite a bit. I was born in a little town which was, let me see, it was on a canal, and it was a little town between the city of Hague and Delft. We were right on the canal so we had an unobstructed view of the land. We lived in a lovely, big brick house, and we had a small canal in front of our house. In other words, if you wanted to come to visit us, you would have to cross this ittle canal. And to ensure privacy, we had a little bridge across this canal, which you could raise. In other words, at nighttime, before you went to bed, you raised this bridge, so no one could cross the canal. During the day, the bridge was there. We had a lovely garden, and my father had about a hundred fruit trees; he had a lovely orchard. He specialized in roses in his garden. And he was a gentleman farmer; he had a business from which he made his living, which was a coal importing business. He had coal shipped in from Germany, and it came on barges, on the canals, and then it was stored in warehouses, and then he sold to dealers. He was like a wholesaler. And that's where his income came from. And we lived in that house until the time that we came to America. HARTMAN: So you were rather well-to-do for a family in the 1900s. BISIGNANO: Yes, we were. Especially during the war years, when everybody else was more or less having a very difficult time, I guess my mother, being young, was not too careful about how she spent her money, you know. Maybe she wasn't very prudent, but she was very generous and very good to her family. I've gone back to Holland and my relatives have said to me that my mother really kept the family alive. She was so good, and because she was a widow with four children, the neighboring landowners who had dairy cows and things like that, they would smuggle food into our house at nighttime, during the night, such as meats and things like that, so we always had enough to eat. And my mother had two brothers and a sister, and they used to come for meals, and things like that. HARTMAN: So, when you were in Holland and your father was still alive, was your sister's family in the United States? I mean, when did you start hearing about-- BISIGNANO: America? HARTMAN: When was the idea implanted in your family's head? BISIGNANO: I don't think that I ever gave it a thought until my mother must have said, at sometime, that she wanted to go to America. I don't know, I can't imagine. Probably, maybe, it was when I was maybe nine years old, I would say, because we came here when I was eleven, and I know that it takes a certain amount of time before you can get into that quota, that immigration quota. You can't just say "I'm going to America," and you go the next day. It wasn't like that at all; you had to wait your turn. So I think she waited her turn, and then she came. HARTMAN: But you had mentioned in your letter that your, I guess, your mother's sister's family sent you back the funny papers. So you had a notion. BISIGNANO: We knew, yes, we did know that there was an America. They had [. . . ] the kids, which was good. You know, there were big funny sheets, like we have today, the comics in the Sunday papers, they used to send those to us. HARTMAN: That must have been quite a treat. BISIGNANO: And of course we didn't understand--we couldn't read. And we just looked at the pictures and thought it was very funny. And my mother got these letters from America, and I guess maybe her sister encouraged her to come. And so it probably planted a seed in her mind, and she decided to, she decided to come here. And so then we left, on I think, sometime in early January, and it was bitter, bitter cold. It was cold on board ship. HARTMAN: Where did you leave from? BISIGNANO: Rotterdam, on the steamship "Rotterdam" of the Holland American Line. HARTMAN: Do you remember any kind of great leaving commotion, in terms of packing up, and what did you, how did you choose what to bring, and-- BISIGNANO: Well, I think that-- HARTMAN: Did you have a lot of notice, or did you all of a sudden leave? BISIGNANO: I think they must have notice because my mother rented the house, which she still owned, she left the house there and rented it, so that was a source of income. That money would be sent to us four times a year. And, to be near, nearer the [Hidden] Line, I think we went, we stayed with an aunt for about a week, not too far from Rotterdam. And we stayed with them, and I remember the family coming every night to make sure that they saw us as much as they possibly could, and-- HARTMAN: So how does a little girl of eleven feel about all this? Is it exciting, frightening, or-- BISIGNANO: Rather exciting. No, it was not frightening. I think we must all have had such confidence in my mother, that she always knew what to do. I think all children feel that way. When the father is dead, the mother is the strong one in the family. So, no, I wasn't frightened. HARTMAN: Were you able to bring things with you, do you remember-- BISIGNANO: Very little, because, who could carry them? She brought very little. HARTMAN: And you being one of the older ones, you had to help with the younger ones. BISIGNANO: I was, yes, that's right. But we were, I think, well disciplined children. I don't think we gave my mother any problems. Really. And she always felt that, you know. In fact, we've all been very self-reliant. And so we got on board ship, and-- HARTMAN: How was--what class did you travel? Did you have to travel in steerage, or, you must have had money at this point-- BISIGNANO: Oh, no, no, no. We didn't travel first class. We did travel--what do you call it today-- HARTMAN: The second class. Did you have a cabin of your own? BISIGNANO: Oh yes, oh yes. In fact, my brother mentioned that last night. He said, "Remember all the bunks in the cabin?" and I said, "Gee, I didn't remember that," and he said, "Yes, I certainly do." And, I couldn't remember. HARTMAN: Had you ever been on a boat before? I mean-- BISIGNANO: No, just canal boats, of course, you know, and things like that. But it--we did get on the boat, and we had fun on the boat. My brother said we had nice times. He said he remembered one thing that happened, that's so silly. He said, he remembered there being Englishmen on board ship. And he said they did the funniest thing: they put salt in their beer. I think that's to flatten it, take the foam away, or something. Well, English people, I think they do drink beer kind of not cold, you know, not chilled, like we had. HARTMAN: Did you have the run of the ship? I mean, the different kinds of classes, were there-- BISIGNANO: Yes, yes. Well, I don't think you paid that much attention when you were a child. By eleven, I think you're just interested in spending your own time, your own way, playing games and doing things like that. This is what we did on board ship. HARTMAN: How long did it take, do you remember? BISIGNANO: I think probably in those days, about two weeks. HARTMAN: That was a long time to be on board. BISIGNANO: Yes. I think it would be two weeks, because I think in 1931 I went to Europe on board a ship and it was a Cunard Line and it took thirteen days. I do think it took about two weeks from Holland, yeah. HARTMAN: And you had relatively smooth sailing, or-- BISIGNANO: No. We saw icebergs, I remember that. Everybody was out on deck, looking at that. It was a stormy crossing, and the water was very rough. They had to put [. . .] on the table to hold your plates so they wouldn't slide all the way down to the other end. And, then they finally came to the base, and we saw the Statue of Liberty. HARTMAN: Before we get to that, let me hear a couple of more details of what you remember. Do you remember what kind of food you were served--was it German food, was it Dutch food? BISIGNANO: Dutch food. Dutch food is very plain food, it is meat, potatoes, and vegetables, and lots of vegetables, with--yes, the food was normal. HARTMAN: And were you aware at any time during your ship voyage that there were steerage passengers? BISIGNANO: No, not at all. I don't remember that at all. HARTMAN: Now, to discuss your arrival--what time of day-- BISIGNANO: It was the morning, it was the morning, and everybody went up on deck. HARTMAN: Did you know what you were looking for, or-- BISIGNANO: Sure! Everybody knew about the Statue of Liberty, before we came to America we knew about New York. But you called it "New Yok" and "Yok" means "dress" so the name of the city meant, "new dress," which is really silly, you know. So we saw the Statue of Liberty, and then we docked in Hoboken. That's where the piers were for the Holland American Line. HARTMAN: What kind of--what went on when everybody saw the Statue of Liberty? BISIGNANO: Oh, talk, talk, talk, talk, talk., you know. Everybody, everybody was thrilled. First of all-- HARTMAN: Your mother, your mother's reaction--she's-- BISIGNANO: My mother just stood by us, and I think she was probably full of hope. She probably was full of hope, knowing, too, that she was going to see her sister. Whom she hadn't seen for quite a long time. So we docked, and then, I remember men coming on board, and I think they were like government inspectors. I hope I'm correct in this. And-- HARTMAN: Official looking people? BISIGNANO: Official looking people, who looked at your credentials. And then it seems to me that there were also some medical men on board, that came on board. And checked you out, maybe superficially, but they did do something. And then, we were detained, in one of the lounges. HARTMAN: On the boat? BISIGNANO: On the boat, yes. With a number of other people. HARTMAN: Did they inspect you, for instance, did they come up to this little girl-- BISIGNANO: I think they looked at my mother's credentials, more or less, just to see, and then they just said, "You go over there, you go into that room." HARTMAN: Had you had any prior inspection, before you even got on the boat, say, in Rotterdam? Did you have a physical exam, or-- BISIGNANO: I think so, I think you must. I think in those days, if I'm not mistaken, if they took you on board ship, they more or less guaranteed that you were healthy. And if you weren't, they had to, I think they had to furnish your transportation back to Holland free of charge. This is what I think, this is the impression I had. I may be wrong. So-- HARTMAN: Back in New York Harbor. BISIGNANO: Yes, we're back in the lounge, and we stayed there for, I don't remember how long, maybe hours, till all these people were tested and examined, and the papers were looked at. HARTMAN: Could you see the New York skyline from the boat? BISIGNANO: Oh yes, of course. HARTMAN: Had you ever seen anything like that? BISIGNANO: No, of course not. As a cousin of mine said one time, you can't put big buildings like this in Holland. Only on a rocky piece of Manhattan can you do that. In Holland we would sink down into the sand, you know. So then they transported us to Ellis Island-- HARTMAN: Did they act a little tough [. . .] BISIGNANO: And there we would, whatever belongings we had with us, I guess mostly clothes, because we had to have clothes on board ship. Mother brought a few little knick-knacks, little things that meant a lot to us. But you couldn't bring anything big. Then, we got to Ellis Island, and then we-- HARTMAN: Did you understand what Ellis Island, what was going to happen on Ellis Island? BISIGNANO: I think my mother did, yes. I think my mother explained that we would have to stay there and wait until my aunt and uncle came, and so we did go to Ellis Island, and we landed, naturally, on the ground floor of the building that we had to go up these great big stairs, to this huge, huge room, gigantic room. HARTMAN: Was it beautiful, or was it just big and official? What did it look like to you? BISIGNANO: Well, you know, it seemed more like you would meet at a railway station. It was a big room, like this, you know, in a railway station, where people are bustling all around--well, people were moving all the time. People weren't just sitting there very complacently. They were just, they were moving, they were talking, and we found a place to sit, and when it came time for meals, we had our meals. HARTMAN: And you ate in a big communal dining room? BISIGNANO: Right, yes. HARTMAN: Were there long tables? BISIGNANO: Right, long tables, there were long tables. And I don't remember about the meals at all. My brother said, last night, he said we got a lot of sandwiches. But all I can remember getting a hard boiled egg for breakfast. It is odd, the things you remember. HARTMAN: And what about the combination sleeping? BISIGNANO: Oh, we slept in a large, very large room. It was full of bunk beds. And all the women slept in one big room; the men slept in another. And my brother, because he was a little fellow, he was able to stay in the same room with my mother, so we all had bunk beds. I think they were three tiers, if I'm not--I don't know how they got up there, but they were bunk beds. HARTMAN: And who else was there? BISIGNANO: Oh, the beds were packed. HARTMAN: People from all over? BISIGNANO: There were people from all over. You didn't know what they were saying, you know. You're just a little group of your own, because you-- HARTMAN: There was a lot to watch, for a little girl. Your eyes-- BISIGNANO: There was. That's right. And we spent the days in this room, this big room, which was more or less bedlam. That's as I remember it, as a child. It seemed they were always calling names. They had all sorts of physical tests. Look at your eyes, ears, nose, and throat. There were men sitting at desks who were officials with papers, and when one of them called out a name the whole place was quiet, just waiting for your turn. So, I know my mother's name was called, and then she said, she explained to us, that they weren't sure that they could take us into this country because we didn't have enough money with us. Well, I think all she had, all she was told that she needed, was two hundred dollars. I don't know why the two hundred dollars sticks in my head, but she said she brought the two hundred dollars. And, she did have some income coming from Holland. But they wanted more than that, because she had four children to support, and they didn't want us to become charges of the state. So then my aunt and uncle had to put up a bond. Well, they came to visit us at the Island; they were told the necessary papers that were required. They, themselves, did not have a house. They lived in a two-family house. So the people who owned the house, the landlords, they put up the bond. Unheard of! HARTMAN: Wow! BISIGNANO: Yeah, this is, this is unusual. They put up the bond. Now, it took time before they went to the lawyers, before they got the necessary papers, but my aunt or my uncle or both would come every day, to the Island, and visit us. HARTMAN: So it wasn't unpleasant. BISIGNANO: No. They brought us fruits, and cookies. They gave us change, in case we needed anything. HARTMAN: Could you buy? BISIGNANO: Yes, but this is what they did. HARTMAN: What could you buy? BISIGNANO: You can't now, but they just felt you needed-- might need something. So, we were there, he said, a week. And then finally we-- HARTMAN: Do you remember it being clean, or-- BISIGNANO: Well, now that you ask, I said to my brother, "Do you remember the sanitary facilities?" He said "Yes." I said, "Well, you know, all my life I thought of how unsanitary they were." You see, in Holland, everything is always so spotlessly clean, that if you just see a little bit of dirt around, it's shocking. To some of those people who may not have lived as well as I was fortunate enough to live, maybe it didn't make any difference. But to me, the toilets always looked as if I didn't want to use them. But then you will consider, looking back on it now when you consider that there were people from all classes and all nations, and they all weren't brought up the same way, and so you have to overlook these things. It was such a big undertaking, I think they did the best they could. HARTMAN: Sure. Tell me, that was a lot of time to fill in for young people, as well as your mother. Did you manage to go about as normal children were--did you play with other children, or-- BISIGNANO: We played, we played, we played and-- HARTMAN: Could you go outdoors? I was always curious what it was like outdoors. BISIGNANO: No. No, we weren't--it was pretty, isn't it--it was pretty outdoors--we weren't outdoors. We were always in this room. HARTMAN: This was January, yes? When you were here? BISIGNANO: Yes. It was January. And I remember spending a lot of time watching these Jewish men write. Because they wrote from one side to the other, and I had, you know, this impressed me, had never seen this before. I have never seen the bearded men before. I have never seen the little caps before. HARTMAN: And they were all dark; you were used to light-- BISIGNANO: That's right. I had never seen a colored person in Holland. HARTMAN: And you saw one on Ellis Island. BISIGNANO: I saw one on Ellis Island. And I saw swarthy people. This--Serbians, maybe Armenians, so you know, this, all this is very stimulating and very exciting. Well, anyway, we stayed there for the week. And finally the papers were taken care of. HARTMAN: How was your mother holding up? Do you remember being aware of that? She must have been exhausted. BISIGNANO: Well, I think she was a bit nervous when my brother had a sore throat and we had to remain until such a time as his throat was better. This is what held us up. The papers came through, and then, because his throat was bad, they wouldn't let us go until they took care of that throat. Which they did. And then finally we got on the ferry, and we came to, I guess, South Ferry. That's where the tender [. . .] Then, it was bitter cold. HARTMAN: Were you with your mother's sister's family at this point? They were guiding you? Or you were just-- BISIGNANO: Yeah. My mother's sister was with us. Her husband was working. They had no children. So, she and my mother and the four got onto the subway. HARTMAN: Oh boy! What was that like? BISIGNANO: Yeah! That was--that was something! That was something I had never seen. Your eyes are open, your ears are listening, you're looking around, you see all these people, this thing moving on the ground. You know, this is all very exciting, very stimulating. Now, the unfortunate this is, that my aunt was not too familiar with the trains in New York, and she, instead of putting us on a west side subway, we were on a Lexington Avenue subway. HARTMAN: So you had to walk. BISIGNANO: That's right. So we get to Lexington Avenue and 125th Street. There were no trolleys running. HARTMAN: What was it like? Do you remember whether it was snowing, or-- BISIGNANO: It was bitter cold. There was so much snow on the ground, that there were no trolleys running. There were no cabs operating. So you had to walk. HARTMAN: Was this during the day? BISIGNANO: It was during the day. It was probably, maybe, mid-morning. And we walked from Lexington Avenue and 125th Street, which is the Harlem of today, all the way across to the river, to the Hudson River. And it was cold. But you see, we're accustomed to cold weather in Holland. We had cheeks on us like, you know, red as apples, and we didn't mind the walking. And I think I mentioned to you that I was impressed with the women of America, because they had lipstick on. They were all, in my eyes, they were beautiful. And, we wlked and we walked and we walked, and finally we arrived at the ferry, got on the ferry boat, and then walked to my old aunt's house. HARTMAN: Across the river. BISIGNANO: Across the river. And just across the river, within a matter of maybe ten blocks, we were where my aunt lived. We didn't stay with my mother's sister; we stayed with an older aunt. She lived in Edgewater. And we landed there. HARTMAN: So that was the end of a long, long journey for the moment. BISIGNANO: That's right. We stayed with her for some months, maybe three months. My mother went to night school right away. HARTMAN: Did you go to school? BISIGNANO: Yes. HARTMAN: As soon as you-- BISIGNANO: We arrived here on the twenty-eighth of January. Then we had a problem going to school, because we had picked up lice in Ellis Island. And we had to have all that eliminated, which was embarrassing, and shocking, and horrible. But anyway, we all went to school. My mother got a job with Alcoa. That's Aluminum Company of America, you probably know that. And that was in Edgewater. If you stand again at Grant's Tomb and look across the river you see this gigantic building. That is, that was, Alcoa's building. She got herself a job at Alcoa. HARTMAN: Before she learned the language, or-- BISIGNANO: As she was learning. HARTMAN: Doing what? What did she do? BISIGNANO: She had an interesting little job. They realized that, you know, she wasn't as fluent in English as she might be, as she would be in turn. So, the officers were on the top floor, tenth floor of the Alcoa Building, and there she ran a little coffee shop. For the girls and men in the office. She made mid-morning coffee, she made little sandwiches at noontime, some tea in the afternoon. And she got a salary. And then sometimes the girls would ask her to bring in something special that she'd make at home. And she would make a little extra money that way. HARTMAN: And would she make things that were-- BISIGNANO: Dutch. Yeah, she would make, maybe little doughnuts, or pastries, and things like that. HARTMAN: Oh, great. Must have been a treat for you as well. BISIGNANO: Yes. Well, mother was, she was mainly, when I think of it now, she was very self-sufficient, that woman. She could do most anything. So she worked there-- HARTMAN: And you went to school-- BISIGNANO: And we went to school. HARTMAN: And how was school? You'd been in school in Holland. BISIGNANO: Private school. I think probably we were a little advanced. Not, of course, in the English language. But when it came to geography, or mathematics, arithmetic in public school, that's the same no matter what language you speak. We were quite a bit ahead. So at eleven, they put me in the fifth grade, in January when I went to school. Through June. And then I went sixth, seventh, and eighth. I had three years, and a couple of months in public school. HARTMAN: And, how long did it take you to feel like just another child? Or, did you feel like an outsider? BISIGNANO: It took a little while, yes, of course. But even, I smile at it now, even as children, you know how to overcome that, and because I felt these children were all so bright, they spoke English, I couldn't speak English. So what did I do? I brought a Dutch book to school. And I sat out on the little stoop that they had at school before you go into the school before class, and I would sit and read my Dutch book. And the kids would gather around. And I said, "Well I know something you don't know." Do you understand? This is what we did. Now, I was rather good in, as I think I mentioned to you, I could draw rather well, so when my brother and sister were in third grade, I would, I would draw little Pinnochios and the teacher would ask me to come in the class and draw the Pinnochios. And I was rather good in my class, I think. HARTMAN: So, did you pick up English? BISIGNANO: Very well. We had to, because we had to market, we had to shop. In those days, you didn't go to a supermarket and just pick out what you wanted. You had to ask for sugar. You had to learn how to say "sugar." You had to learn how to say "tea" or "coffee." So you learned, and children are very adept at that. HARTMAN: And you must have helped one another. BISIGNANO: Yes. My older sister was really, she was really rather shy and a very reserved person all her life. But she was, she was really ahead of us when it came to daring to go out and buy things. She did very good. We sort of let her do it for a while. HARTMAN: This is the end of side one of tape number 187. END OF SIDE ONE, TAPE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE HARTMAN: This is side two of tape one of interview number 187. So, we're in Edgewater, and you're in school, learning English. Tell me a little more about how you integrated yourself into your American life. Did it all seem very strange? BISIGNANO: I think because we were the only foreign children in that particular school, everyone was very curious about us. And I can remember being invited to girls' homes. The druggist in town, his daughter invited us to her home for dinner. There was another girl I liked very much, and she asked us to come to dinner, my sister and I. And, the children were open--oh, children are children. If they don't understand you, by motion you will become understood. And they were all nice children. We lived in a--my mother, after working a few months, we left my aunt's apartment and we got an apartment of our own. And, it was in a large building that had eight apartments. There were two such apartment buildings, so there were sixteen families. And it seemed to me that on every floor were a number of children--some four, some three, there were so many children it was unbelievable. And we played together, and we played all sorts of games, and I enjoyed sports very much, but I learned, I was never a child to play with dolls, but I learned to play baseball rather well. HARTMAN: Oh, boy, that's a very American sport! BISIGNANO: I wound up as the first baseman. On the baseball team. My brother, who was a [. . .], he was always in the outfield, dropping the ball, and embarrassing me to death. He was a sweet boy; he was lovely. The children were--they came from--they were American born, but they were from all different nationalities. We had Italian children, we had Polish children, there were Irish. HARTMAN: here must have been lots of different smells going around-- BISIGNANO: There were, there were! And, the people were very friendly. All the mothers had the same problems, raising children. And we all played--in those days, you played in the street. And I remember in Edgewater we had a curfew. And at nine o'clock at night that curfew would blow, and everybody went indoors. In the winter time it was eight o'clock. But we all played out until about nine o'clock in the summertime. HARTMAN: What did it look like? Was it--not as developed as it is now, was it clean and-- BISIGNANO: Well, the apartment houses, in back of the apartment houses, there was nothing but just hill and the Palisades. And the Palisades are really quite beautiful. And the Palisades came down, then there were houses along the one street. In fact, Edgewater only has two streets. One along the Hudson, and one just one block west of that. Edgewater is long, but very narrow because of the Palisades. Now, talking about the Palisades, it makes me think of the very first time that, to get to the top of the hill, say Fort Lee, or Grantwood, those were the towns up on top of the hill, you had to take a trolley. And that trolley had to climb the hill. Now, you should see this trolley at nighttime when it's all lit up. This old trolley would wind itself halfway up the hill, then make a horseshoe turn, then the conductor would have to get out and change the pole--they had poles on those trolleys--and then go up the rest of the way. Well, to see a trolley like that, climbing a hill, was an unbelievable sight to me. I had always lived on level ground, so I was fascinated by that. That was another wonder of America. So I went to school there. HARTMAN: The teachers, were they nice to you? BISIGNANO: They were lovely. They were so nice, and my very favorite teacher was--she was the domestic science teacher, and her name was Miss [Tryee]. She lived in New York. And, you know, she would teach us how to make cupcakes, and candy, and so on. But she likes to meet, every time we had domestic science class, [meet] a cup of vegetables for the soup. Every day we made a big pot of soup, there were all the children, they'd sell it, maybe five cents a bowl, and I would cut up all these vegetables. Now, when I graduated, she gave me a beautiful garnet ring, so you see, they were really very nice to me. Yes, they were very nice to me. And the principal of the school was very fond of my brother. And the principal had cats. Lots of cats! And she lived next door to us. And my brother used to go and empty her wastepaper basket, and do little chores for her. So we became integrated in the neighborhood. HARTMAN: And within your apartment setting, where all these different families were, from different backgrounds and things, that's where you began to learn about the world, I suppose. BISIGNANO: Yes, that's right. And then, of course, I stayed in Edgewater there until I graduated from public school, and then I went to Leonia, to high school for one year. That's all the education I've had. And when I was through with one year of high school, then, I went to work. And I worked for two years, in New York, in a department store. And went to night school. So after two years, I got a job in an office. HARTMAN: By this time you knew English well. BISIGNANO: Very well, very well. HARTMAN: What do you remember about things that were new to you. Could you tell me about jello. BISIGNANO: Oh, jello! That was a big thing! That was a once-a-week dessert, you know! Beautiful mass of jello, on Sunday, was just absolutely. HARTMAN: I bet your mother had to really adapt to American cooking, stuff like that. BISIGNANO: That's right. HARTMAN: But that's an adventure, I suppose. BISIGNANO: Not that--she did well, she knew how to do things. HARTMAN: Did she sort of maintain your Dutch life as well, as much as she could? BISIGNANO: I think we became so Americanized so quickly, it's unbelievable. In school, I became friendly with a gal who's still my best friend. And her mother was a widow. And on Sunday, because the widow had only this one child, this girl Helen, she would invite me every Sunday. And every Sunday after dinner I would go there and play with Helen. We would play jacks, and the mother was a very bright lady, and she took us to concerts, to hear different singers, she took us to different churches on a Sunday, and she really exposed me to some of the finer things, that my mother didn't have time for, let's put it that way. So, her daughter went on to college, and when the daughter graduated, she wanted to take her to Europe. And she wanted to know if I would like to go to Europe too. And I said, "Yes, I would." I was then twenty-two. I had inherited money from my father. When my father died, although my mother didn't have access to money that he left for the children, when I became twenty-one, he left me a sum of money, and each one, when we became twenty-one years old, we got this money. So when I was twenty-one, I received this money. Which, in those days, I guess--what, fifty- some odd years ago--it was a couple of thousand dollars, which is-- HARTMAN: A lot-- BISIGNANO: Quite nice. In Dutch money, it must have been much more than that. So, I went to Europe with her, and I think this gave me--oh, I just always want to travel, you know, see things, you know. HARTMAN: You certainly have been an adventurer. BISIGNANO: Yeah! Oh, I've been to Greece twice; I've been to Italy about three times; I've been to France twice. England a couple of times--yeah, I've been around. It's been really very nice. HARTMAN: So, becoming--how about citizenship? When did you become a citizen? BISIGNANO: Well, I didn't have to become a citizen. I became a citizen automatically, under my mother's papers. When my mother became a citizen, the children who were under twenty-one, and we were, they all became citizens normally. HARTMAN: She did become a citizen right away? BISIGNANO: Oh, indeed, oh yes. She was very, very American. Absolutely. And I think she was proud of the way we all managed to fit in. HARTMAN: So, you must have been on your own quite a lot, if she was working. BISIGNANO: She worked, and then my sister and I took turns. One week, I would do the cooking, and that week she would do the cleaning and making the beds. And the following week we would reverse that process. And so we learned. Now, when my mother gave up her job to get married, she hadn't cooked for a while because we had been doing it. She would ask me, "How did you make this?" and "How did you make that?" HARTMAN: Did she marry an American? BISIGNANO: Yes. He was a widower, and they had a child; they had a daughter. When I was sixteen, they had a daughter. So, I have a half-sister. HARTMAN: So your mother didn't work after that? BISIGNANO: No, no. Then, when he died, then she went back to work for a little while. Then she worked for Englewood Hospital, and she worked in the diet kitchen. And she lived there; she lived on the premises. HARTMAN: Did she ever go back to Holland? Did she want to? BISIGNANO: No, no. Then, when she was seventy-five years old, she married again. HARTMAN: My goodness gracious! BISIGNANO: She married, and she was married for ten years before he died, and she lived to be eighty-seven. So she was of good, sturdy stock, wasn't she? HARTMAN: Well, it sounds like she was glad she made the decision to come here. BISIGNANO: Oh, of course. HARTMAN: Would she talk about it with you? I mean--or you just didn't have time-- BISIGNANO: You will find this out, as you get older, that the things you should have asked your parents, you don't bother. It's only when you're older yourself, and they're gone, you say, "Why didn't I ask her how this came about?" and "How did this come about?" You just don't do that. And you should. HARTMAN: You're in the midst of it, yeah. BISIGNANO: You should. There are so many things now that I wish I had asked her, and just never did. I guess we're so busy with our own lives and so involved in our own lives, that-- HARTMAN: Well, you were really forging new territory, it seems. BISIGNANO: That's right, that's right. HARTMAN: So you were very much on your own-- BISIGNANO: At fifteen, I went to work. I was--yes--I was-- HARTMAN: What did you do? Did you work for Alcoa as well? BISIGNANO: No, I worked for a department store for two years, and then I got an office job. And, when I got the office job, then met my husband, who was my boss. HARTMAN: And did you have a sense that you would be able to do a lot more here; did you realize at some point that the opportunities were much greater for you as a young woman? BISIGNANO: Well, but you see, I couldn't judge, because as a child you don't think about the opportunities, right? As a child, you just remember-- HARTMAN: Playing? BISIGNANO: Playing. I don't know whether I told you, when I went back--I don't remember the year, maybe five, six years ago--I had a friend with me, and I said, "Would you like to see the house where I was born?" And she said, "I would love it." I also had a Dutch friend with me. And the three of us went to the home where I was born, and we rang the bell. And, a gentleman answered the door, and he wanted to know what we'd like, and my friend, the Dutch girl, Tina, explained that I had been born in this house, and I would just love to see it again. I was nostalgic. He said, "By all means, come on in." He said, "I'm having a meeting with some business associates of mine, but my wife will be glad to take you around." So, of course, she didn't have to take me around, I knew the house. And it was such a nice thing, what they had done to the house. They couldn't--structurally they didn't change it; it was a big house. But she had excellent taste in furnishings, and she had done really a beautiful job. The kitchen, in those days, was, had a great big long counter, but in those days, they didn't have faucets and things; we had a pump and that had all the modern--she had modern cabinets in the kitchen, it was a huge kitchen, and she did nice things with it. Then we went outside and I saw the garden. And the gardeners were working there, and the lady asked us if we would like to sit down. And we sat out on the terrace; it was not a terrace, it was a colonial type of porch, like you see down south. And she brought out the silver coffee service, and she served us coffee and cake, and then I walked through the garden, and I asked her, I said, "What happened to the walnut tree?" And she said, "You remember a walnut tree?" I said, "Yes, we had a big walnut tree, and my father had a little bench built around it, and a little table, so we children could play there." Now, when the war broke out, the government appropriated all the walnut trees, because--for gun handles, you see, they need walnut--so the inspector came around to measure the circumference of the tree, and even though it was the right size, I think he felt so badly about taking it away from a widow and four children who needed to play there, but he said the tree wasn't large enough. So he left the tree there. Now, when I went back to Holland, on this last trip, I went to look for the tree. And I said to the owner of the house, "What happened to the walnut tree?" He aid, "You remember that walnut tree?" I said, "Well, yes, it was here, in 1920." He said, "We just lost it last year. It was just old." But knew exactly where that tree was. And behind the garden, there was a little canal, where my brother and I used to play along the canal, until one day, he fell in, you know? So you remember all the nice little things. We had apples, and we had strawberries, and we had figs, we had all sorts of fruit. It was absolutely wonderful. HARTMAN: It sounds like paradise! BISIGNANO: It was absolutely wonderful. It was a lovely place. HARTMAN: So, you don't remember the war, really, intruding on your lives, so much. Your father's property was-- BISIGNANO: Only that, we weren't forced to house soldiers, because there are only women in the house, see. But, all families that had a man at the head of the house, they had--what did they call that?-- HARTMAN: Quartering? BISIGNANO: No, there's a word for it, where you have to house soldiers--but next to our property, they had stables set up, and they had the Dutch--you know what [Huzars] are? With the [shaker] hats, and so on. Well, they were there, with their horses, and they used to let us, at times, they would let us ride the horses. It was just absolutely lovely. My childhood was lovely, absolutely lovely. And when I came to America, probably it wasn't--well, it was different. Really very good, and stimulating, hasn't done me any harm, made me self-sufficient. So, I have a lot to thank this country for. HARTMAN: Do you celebrate on the Fourth of July? BISIGNANO: You bet I do! You bet! HARTMAN: Well, maybe we should talk about the Statue. Why don't we talk about the Statue once again, just to make sure we have it on tape. You were on the boat, and--how did you know when to start looking for it? Did the captain tell people that-- BISIGNANO: Oh, well, the word gets around. The night before, "Tomorrow morning, you're going to see the Statue of Liberty" and everybody was up and everybody was out there looking. Everybody was out there. It was a very exciting thing, because I think all people's hopes--you could see the light in their eyes. You knew how people felt. You know, they were all so thrilled, and just to have made the journey, too, because it was a-- HARTMAN: It was a symbol of the end of the journey-- BISIGNANO: Yes, and it wasn't an easy journey, because it was January, and the weather was not too nice, and it was stormy, and I'm sure people must have been frightened, in many ways. HARTMAN: Worried? BISIGNANO: Worried, of course. HARTMAN: Worried if they had enough money-- BISIGNANO: Of course. And whether they were going to be accepted. Although I don't think that entered my mother's mind at all. I don't think she was ever-- HARTMAN: She didn't worry about having to come back? BISIGNANO: No, no, I don't think so. HARTMAN: She had enough to worry about. BISIGNANO: That's right. She had four children to take care of, you see. HARTMAN: But you must have added to her confidence, that her children were there, and helpful, whether she was going to be able to have done all this. BISIGNANO: Yes, and besides, it gave us confidence. We knew my mother could do no wrong; whatever she said was right. She was always steering us in the right direction. To be truthful, my mother--knock wood, I'm allowed to knock wood--She never had any problems with, she never had to sit down and say, "You must not do this," or "You must do that." It was just understood, somehow. So she must have been a very good, unusual mother, because I had no real father to teach me. You know, and they say today, a child is brought up in a fatherless home, it may not be the worst thing in the world. If the mother is strong enough. HARTMAN: Was your mother a patriotic American? Did she like baseball and ice cream, and apple pie? BISIGNANO: Oh, ice cream, yes, and apple pie, and, of course, she married a man who liked--he liked apple pie and he liked ice cream, and she made all the things that he liked, you know. Yeah, she was a good housekeeper, she was a good cook, she was a good wife. She lived a very productive life, I think, very good. HARTMAN: Well, I don't have any more questions. If there's anything else you'd like to tell us. I think you've really summed it up. BISIGNANO: I think so. Just think back, yourself, how much can you remember of the time of your life when you were, say, eleven? It has to be something really dramatic that impresses you, and, of course, this was dramatic. But maybe nothing happened very dramatic, in your life. Maybe it was like ten, and twelve, and thirteen, right? It was different. HARTMAN: Well, thank you very much. BISIGNANO: My pleasure. It's been lovely, really lovely. HARTMAN: This is the end of interview number 187 with Jeanne Bisignano. The time is 11:40.