DANE: . . . 1985. We're beginning the interview at 5:20 PM. We're about to interview Fannie Shoock about her immigration experience from Poland/Russia in 1921 when she was ten years old. Fannie Shoock, will you tell me what year you were born and what town you were born in? SHOOCK: I was born in a little village called Welin. DANE: Would you spell that? SHOOCK: W-E-L-I-N, which at that time was Russia. And after the First World War it converted to Poland. And I was born in the year of 1910. DANE: What was, can you describe what your town was like? Was it a big town, a small village? SHOOCK: It's what they used to, what we, amongst ourselves, call a shetl, if you ever heard that expression. We were five Jewish families, and close to three hundred farmers. Uh, one of my uncles had the mill that milled the wheat into flour. Another, a cousin, had the, charge of, of the forestry where wood was cut down and sold, shipped to other places. My mother was a business lady. I don't recall what the other two families were because they were from the wrong side of the tracks and we were not allowed to associate with them. ( she laughs ) DANE: What kind of businesswoman was she? Did she have a shop? SHOOCK: She had what I call a shop on her back. While my father was in America, and during the war, First World War, money, or letters, were not coming through. She had to provide for four children, my two older brothers, my younger sister, and me. So she used to buy produce from the farmers, take it to the nearest city, which was, I think, about six miles away, sell it to the storekeepers, buy from them things that the farmers needed, and sell it to the farmers. So she carried all her merchandise on her back. She didn't even have a horse and wagon. Later on, when she prospered a little bit, she did have a horse and wagon. DANE: What year did your father come to America? SHOOCK: First time or second time? ( she laughs ) DANE: Oh, first time. SHOOCK: First time he, now, I don't remember the year he came the first time. I know they were married in 1903. It was several years after that, no more than two or three, and he came to America. That was before the war broke out. DANE: How come he came? SHOOCK: How come he came? Well, it's going to be a long story. DANE: That's okay. SHOOCK: When my father and mother got married, he was from a different town than where my mother lived. In those days the rule in Russia was that when a couple got married, the wife had to go live in the town where the husband's residence was, and that was because of military service, in case they needed him. My father decided no, he wanted to live, he could do much better business wise, in the town where my mother was. He was a stubborn man, and they wouldn't allow that. So the police, soldiers hounded him, jailed him, he ran away, he hid. After I think about two or three years he got tired of it and ran away to America. That's what every Jew did. When they couldn't take Russia any more, you run away to America. When he came to America, I think he landed in Baltimore. From there he went to New York for a brief period of time. He didn't like America. It was strange to him, it was foreign to him, it wasn't kosher as far as he was concerned, you know what that means. He never wanted to work on the Sabbath. In America you are compelled to sometimes to make a living. So he was there for three years in America and came back. DANE: Was this before the war when he came back? SHOOCK: Oh, yes, yes. They got married in 1903. All this happened, I think, before about 1907, something like that. I would have to analyze it sometime, according to the ages. When he came back to Europe, he again insisted on living where he wanted to live, and again they hounded him and chased him. In the meantime, when he returned from America, that's when I was born and my younger sister was born. And in 1913 he couldn't stand, take it any more, and he left for America the second time. In 1913, I guess I was about three years old, three or four years old. The following, no, this was 1914, 1914 when he went, just a couple months before the war broke out. He went back to America the second time. Then, of course, there was no communication during the four years of the World War. Where we lived was on the border between Russia, Poland, a little bit of Germany. ( she sighs ) So we had hardships of all the advancing armies, the retreating armies. Our house happened to be the nicest house in the village, built up high, so that's where all the generals stayed. We were shoved into one room in the back of the house. They had the whole house to themselves. And, of course, especially after the, uh, uh, Czar Nicolai was killed, the Russian Czar, various armies came up. Everybody wanted to be in command, and they advanced and they retreated, and every time that happened we were in fear of our life, especially because we were Jewish. DANE: Did your mother have to feed these people? Did she have to take care of them as . . . SHOOCK: Yes, she had some things that she had to do. I don't think she had the right food for them. But we were shoved into the back, one room in back of the house. Uh, she had certain duties. I don't, I can't tell you what they were, I don't know. And we had to run away and hide in the woods, and we had to dig trenches, sometimes we hid in them, and this I just tell you. One night, this was Yom Kippur. I'm sure you've heard of our holiday Yom Kippur. The, we didn't have a synagogue in our village. We would have the Torah in somebody's house for the services. Since our house was the nicest and the biggest, it was in our house. So one Yom Kippur evening we were all praying, and all of a sudden we heard this awful shelling right, like as if it was in our front yard. So, of course, everybody went home, and we covered our windows with blankets and everything else and put the lights out, and crawled under the tables, because, like, the shells were falling all around us. Well, finally that stopped. In the morning we went outside. There was a great big hole, like you would call a crater, only not as big as a crater, with a bullet stuck in it. A great, I remember seeing it. It was about this side and about this long. DANE: About eight inches long and about ten inches wide? SHOOCK: No. I would say about six inches wide and maybe about twelve, I think it was about twice as long as wide. And later o somehow they took out the insides of it and my mother used that to hide money in it underneath, in the ground, underneath the wooden floor. ( she laughs ) And she said the reason we were safe, some of the houses were hit, ours was not, and she said the reason our house wasn't touched, we were all safe, because the Torah was in our house. DANE: She might be right. SHOOCK: Well, it's a belief. DANE: One question on the background, on the military service, was that for all citizens in the Soviet, in Russia? SHOOCK: Men of a certain age, and that's why a lot of young men ran away to America, so as not have to serve in the Army. ( voice off mike ) DANE: Yeah, during the czar. Yeah. And you were there when the, the Revolution happened in 1907. SHOOCK: Well, I lived it. I lived it. DANE: Was that the only occasion when they came through the village and had military battles? Do you remember other occasions when . . . DANE: Well, it wasn't only battles. It was the fact that these various, uh, bands that wanted to take command after the czar was killed, there was the Petlurowtzes, the Haidomokes, the, uh, various, various names. And as they advanced, if you were Jewish, you weren't, you weren't safe. So you had to run away and hide. And fortunately some of the neighbors who were not Jewish were very kind and they warned us that they were coming, so we had time to run into the forest and hide. And the house was ransacked any number of times. Once, when we returned from the forest to our home, there was nothing in the house. Everything was gone from the walls. Every stick of furniture. The sewing machine, the cow, which was my mother's livelihood, she used to make butter and sell it, and cheese and so on. We had milk to drink. The, uh, ceder chest, what you would call a ceder chest where you kept all your valuables, that was gone. All we had was little, they left us little seed potatoes that were not edible. They were for planting. That's all we had to eat. And thank God for America, Hoover was in charge, and he saw to it that flour and stuff came into Europe, and we got some of the flour, and I think it must have been saccharine, something very, very sweet and that's all the food we had. My mother took the saccharine and the flour and made a liquid out of it, and that was our food I don't know for how long, until we were able to raise food ourselves. But we weren't hungry. DANE: Before you go on, can you possibly spell the name of those two bands the army . . . SHOOCK: Petlurowtzes. I could try. I could just try to spell it by the sound of it. P-E-T, wait a minute, no, give me a pencil and paper. Let me write it out. I think I'll do better if I write it out. DANE: Okay. If you could say it and then spell it. SHOOCK: All right. Uh, one of the bands names was Petlurowtzes. I think you would spell it P-E-T-L-U-R- O-W-T-Z-E-S, it was pronounced Petlurowtzes. . And the other one would be Haidomokes, and that would be spelled H-A-I-D-O-M-O-K-E-S, I think. I don't know. I never saw it in writing. DANE: So this, so then you had this saccharine/flour mix to get you through . . . SHOOCK: It was a liquid. Formed it into like, uh, syrup. And that was our food. If it wasn't for this, if it wasn't for America, we would have starved. DANE: At what point did you people decide to join your father and leave? SHOOCK: Well, it wasn't that we decided. When the war was over, then my father and mother made contact by my father writing. We were still in the same place. Then he started making papers to bring us over to America, and that wasn't done till 1921. You couldn't do a thing till about 1919, because everything's an upheaval, I guess, over there. And then he, he asked for us to come, being he was an American, he was not an American citizen, being he had the right then to ask for his wife and children to come. And we did. DANE: Uh-huh. When you left the town, was it under duress? Were you forced from the town? SHOOCK: No. We were not forced from the town. It was Poland then. DANE: After the war. SHOOCK: Yeah, it was Poland. We were not forced to leave. We could have stayed. DANE: When did you get word that it was time to come? SHOOCK: When my father sent the papers for us. He had to ask for us, with visas and passports and money. We were waiting for him to bring us over. DANE: What year was it when you picked up and started, started the journey? SHOOCK: Oh, I think it took us about nine months. Because we had to go to a big city to get papers, and they had to go to another big city. Then my oldest, we got to Warsaw, my oldest brother got sick and we had to wait till he got better. You don't come into America when you're sick. We were on the road about nine months. DANE: When you left your town, were you sad, were you glad? SHOOCK: No, I wasn't sad. DANE: Any, what were your feelings? SHOOCK: You know, I can't rightly recall. I know I was not sad, not sad to leave. But I can't recall being happy about it neither. I guess, being a child, you did as your mother ordained, shall we say. DANE: And what provisions did you bring? Did you take much with you from your home? I mean, a lot of it was gone by then. DANE: No, no, my mother had time to make up for it. We had, our house was furnished again. What did we take with us, our clothes, not too much, our pillows, our big, thick, what you call comforters here, made from pure goose feathers, not chicken feathers. And a barrel of pickles, and my mother made some cheese balls which could travel without refrigeration. You prepared them somehow and you dry them on the roof of your house in the hot sun. And she baked chalies, that's white bread. And she bought salamis. Things that are, that could keep without refrigeration. We took all that along with us. Now, we lived in the village. In order to get to, to get anywheres, you had to cross a river. And the way you, ( she laughs ) and the way you cross that river, was by a flat platform which was called a perom, and it worked on pulleys, like you have on clotheslines sometime? So, of course, it was, there was an embankment. All our belongings were on a horse and a wagon. We were going to the next city. And the horse and wagon start going down to the perom, and the horse, and the wagon tips over. ( she laughs ) DANE: Oh, no! SHOOCK: And a barrel of pickles goes down the river. ( she laughs ) DANE: And everything, or just . . . SHOOCK: No, just, everything else was all right. Just the barrel of pickles. Because it was round it kept rolling. Couldn't catch it. Of course, my mother was heartbroken, you know. We got to the next city, and as you traveled along the way, you spent your nights outdoors. No hotels. I remember this particular night, real dark, after we had crossed this perom, we got ready to spend the night out in the open. We had a man to drive our horse and wagon. My mother hired someone to take us the next village. She was going to pay him. Then she would have to hire somebody else, and so on, he was going to go back. So this man says to my mother, I wasn't asleep, and I heard him, and I was, I think I realized what he meant, he says to my mother, "What will you do if a bear comes along?" She said, "Well, just so long as it's not a two-footed one I'm not afraid." She meant him. ( she laughs ) I think she meant him. DANE: That's funny. SHOOCK: Spent the night out in the open, got to the next city, and he was discharged, and then hired somebody else, take us to the next place. DANE: Huh. And all this traveling, was it exciting for you as a child, or was it . . . SHOOCK: It wasn't exciting. It was miserable. It wasn't exciting. You had to do without, without so many comforts. Not that we had that many comforts. But there were no, there was no water, for instance. You sleep outdoors. DANE: Uh-huh. Uh-huh. SHOOCK: It is frightening to sleep outdoors. Because it's out in the open. There were wolves around. ( voice off mike ) ( break in tape ) DANE: Leaving. I just want to make sure that you left because your father was here. SHOOCK: Yes. Of course. DANE: Would he have ever considered coming back, or was living there too dangerous as . . . SHOOCK: Didn't consider it. The idea was to leave Russia, leave Poland, and by that time he had been in America long enough to realize that America was okay. So he brought us over, which was the normal thing to do for him. Now, a lot of men didn't do that. They just forgot about their families back home. Got themselves other families here. DANE: What city did you leave from? Where was your final goal for the exit port to get on the boat to come? SHOOCK: Uh, Antwerp. Belgium. DANE: How long were you, oh, but you stopped in . . . SHOOCK: We stopped in many places, yes. We spent a lot of time in Warsaw where we had to get our papers, our final papers, and there's where my brother got sick, in Warsaw. DANE: And you had to wait until he . . . SHOOCK: Until he recuperated. DANE: Did you get your visas in Warsaw, or did you have them before you left? Because I understand that you had to go to the Consulate and get a medical check there before you came over. SHOOCK: No, well, in our, in where we lived, there was no such thing. We had to go to the big city, and I'm sure it must have been in Warsaw where we got, I know we got papers in Warsaw and we were examined in Warsaw. DANE: Do you remember the examination, the medical exam, what they were looking for? Your eyes? SHOOCK: Sure. There was a problem with me. The problem was I didn't have any vaccination mark, although my mother swore up and down that I was vaccinated. So they vaccinated me, and it didn't take. They vaccinated a second time, it didn't take. They vaccinated a third time, still didn't take. They decided I must be immune, or just it isn't going to show period, and they let me go. That, too, was a delay. DANE: Well, did you know the importance of being medically fit to be allowed in? Were you, did you know, your mother's . . . SHOOCK: I didn't know, but I realized it because, uh, because of what happened to me, and because of what happened to my brother in Warsaw, we were told, "If he doesn't get well, you will not be able to get into America." And what happened to my younger sister ( she addresses the recording engineer ) this is maybe a little embarrassing to O.J. Okay, O.J., if it's a little embarrassing to you? O.J.: Not at all. SHOOCK: See, I was ten, she was eight. And, uh, when we got to Ellis Island, or someplace, I don't remember where it was, I think it was Ellis Island, I don't know if you got a physical there or not . . . DANE: Yes, you do. SHOOCK: Okay. We had to strip. Take everything off, and whatever we wore had to go through sterilization. The word used then was disinfection. Sterilization, which means heat, steam, or something, right? All right. Somebody wore something red, which got on the back of my sister's white dress. Well, here's a little girl, that's eight years old, and she's menstruating. ( she laughs ) Well, that caused an awful lot of excitement. So right away the whole family was pushed aside, not to hold anybody else back, and taken to a separate room until somebody decided, or it was proven, no, this is, it's fading. DANE: Uh-huh. Amazing. SHOOCK: There was an experience. We were all scared to death. DANE: When you were in, uh, Warsaw, and your d was ill, and your vaccination problems, did you know that your mother was worried, or not worried, or concerned about maybe being detained and not allowed to come over? SHOOCK: I felt it, I don't know if I could say I knew it, but I could see the concern, the worry. It concerned me, too. DANE: Then it was time to go. You were through the quarantine, you were ready to get on the boat, do you remember the day that you left? SHOOCK: I'll never forget it. ( she laughs ) It was a nice, first of all, traveling from Warsaw to Antwerp was such a revelation, such excitement to me, till the present day, it left its mark on me. I never seen street life before, never been on a train before until this journey. So we're going, I guess, from Warsaw to someplace, across the bridge, across water, there were lights, and the reflection of the lights in the water, and the train was going so fast, and we're supposed to be asleep, but I was not asleep. I was looking out the window. And it, I, I, it thrilled me, somehow, to see that. In the present day, when I see even lights on the street at night, oh, yeah, at that time, when I saw it, I said, "Gee, it looks like a string of pearls. And the present day when I see it, even here, when I look out my window on 16th Street, at night, the street goes up and down like that, it reminds me of that particular scene. And, before boarding ship, my mother and my brothers, my sister and I are sitting on the bank with all our belongings around us, watching it, no one should steal it. There was a good salami, there was all that bread that we didn't dare touch on the road, because that was for aboard ship, because aboard ship there was no kosher food. On the road you managed, you bought, you, somehow. And the cheese balls, that our mouths were watering for over the entire trip and somebody comes by, I remember it was a man, I don't remember who, and he says to my mother, what do you have there?" She tells him what she has there. I don't know if it was someone from aboard ship, or who it was. So he says to her, oh, you can't take that aboard, no food allowed. So we went aboard ship and left all our food on the river bank. We get, we get aboard, a lot of people brought their food. So we were, I wouldn't say we were hungry aboard ship. We were, we were not well fed because we were kosher. We didn't eat anything that was cooked or, nothing that was cooked. So we survived on bread, hard boiled eggs, not scrambled, because that would be cooked and you cancel, a potato, which I'm sure was baked, I don't remember, but it must have been baked, because I think if it was boiled we wouldn't have touched it. And there was, we survived the eight, eight days aboard ship. The seas were very rough. I was the only one that didn't get seasick, took care of everybody else. And, uh, we went, we came second class, not steerage . . . DANE: So did you have a cabin? SHOOCK: We had a cabin. Because my father sent money. And my mother had money. So we had it nice aboard ship, except that everybody was sick, and I was the nurse for everybody. I was the only one that was well. I'd fetch and get and bring and take. DANE: Did you remember going down? Did you ever go look in steerage? SHOOCK: No, no. No, I never did. We knew there was such a thing, but we didn't go, I didn't go down. I'm sure one of my brothers did, but I know that I didn't. And, uh, on first class, the people there could look down on us on the second class. There was like a span between two sections of the ship. And a man there I think took a shine to my mother. As young as I was, I realized that's what it had to be. It couldn't be me, it couldn't be my younger sister, it couldn't be my brother. Wherever we stood, he threw down hard candy wrapped in paper, or a lemon, or a piece of fruit, which was a luxury, especially if you're seasick, especially if you're hungry. And, uh, he did that a number of times, threw down things like that to us. And we'd bend down, pick it up, and look up, sort of thank him in a way. One day he threw down two bananas. We had never seen a banana in our life. And if you're a European Orthodox Jew, if it was anything that you didn't know what it was you didn't touch it. Threw it away. So the first thing, my mother saw, I bent down, I picked up one banana, and my brother bent down and picked up the other banana. We were looking at it. Didn't know what in the world it was. And my mother says, "Throw away," in Yiddish, of course. (Yiddish) So I, being an obedient girl, a good girl, took my banana and threw it overboard. My brother ate the banana skin and all. ( she laughs ) And till the present day, when we get together, he lives in Florida, and we get together occasionally, we reminisce about that and we both burst out laughing, how he ate that banana with the skin and all. DANE: Oh, that's funny. Any other first impressions of things that you saw for the first time on the ship? ( voice off mike ) Any other first impressions on the boat, other things that impressed you as a young girl? SHOOCK: Well, I can refer to some, to someone else that came with us. We came here, my father was not an American citizen. For some reason or other he never became an American citizen up until late in life. I think they were supposed to go to South America. My father and mother, they were planning a trip, of course you had to be an American citizen. I think that's when he became a citizen. I wanted to become a citizen before he, I wanted to become an American citizen, after I married him. So I had to have certain information to put on our papers. One of them was, uh, who else came aboard ship with us, the name of the ship, and the date, and where we left, just like now, and the name of one or two people that came across with us. Well, I only remembered one name. See, I was already in Washington when I applied. My family was in Detroit and the people that could maybe help me with the information, I don't know where they were any more. But I remembered one name, one family that we associated with aboard ship. It was a woman and her daughter who were coming to America on their own. The husband did not send for them, she was coming here to find him, and they were very, very sick. And they also went to Detroit, and from there they were supposed to go somewhere's else. And that's about the only thing that I can remember, except that my, one of my brothers got in an awful lot of trouble aboard ship, just like he did back home, he was a rascal, give my mother an awful lot of problems. ( she laughs ) DANE: Would he run around on board, and . . . SHOOCK: Yes. He could answer a lot of questions about what happened aboard ship. He could answer a lot of questions. DANE: Then you arrived in New York, do you remember the day, was it day when you pulled into the harbor? SHOOCK: No, when we arrived in New York, yes. When we got off, got off on Ellis Island, it was the following morning. We arrived the day before. Yes, it was, we was daytime, and I don't remember how we got to the station to board the train. I don't begin to remember. There must have been someone there to help us, because there was such a thing. There is such a thing as the HIAS. You heard of them? Well, they must have taken us in tow and directed us, and we took a train, I remember riding on the train, and we got off at Michigan Central Station in Detroit, and it was nighttime, and it was pouring and it was thundering and it was lightening, and my father came to pick us up in an open touring car. ( she laughs ) DANE: Oh, no! SHOOCK: With all our baggage, with five of us. DANE: This is the end of side one, interview number 72, with Fannie Shoock. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO DANE: This is the beginning of side two, number 72, interview with Fannie Shoock in Silver Spring, Maryland. We'll get back to when you're in Detroit, but I don't want you to leave Ellis Island yet. I didn't ask you the name of the boat. Do you remember the ship, the name? SHOOCK: Oh, I should have looked it up. Uh, either Red Star Line or White Star Line. I don't recall which it is. DANE: And the Statue of Liberty? Had you heard about her before you came? SHOOCK: I must have, because when we neared it, everybody ran close to the part of the ship that was facing the statue. We were Second Class, we had no problem, we were out in the open. Uh, we were all excited. What we called it, this is America. We didn't, at least I didn't, know anything about the Statue of Liberty. To me it meant this is America. And you could see the tall buildings in the background. And we all stood and just looked and looked and looked. DANE: Could you hear other people? Were they . . . SHOOCK: Talking. Yeah. People were talking, but as to what was said, I don't know. To me it meant this is America. I, I was glad about, I was glad the journey was over, I guess. DANE: Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Did it, was it an impressive statue to you, I mean . . . SHOOCK: Oh, yes. It was so big. It was so big and, uh, I don't know whether I learned at the time or some time later why her arm was raised and what's with that, what is in her arm. I don't, I know I got that information sometime, I just don't know when. I remember asking about it. DANE: The ship docked. Do you remember what happened when the ship came in the harbor? What happened then? Were you let off the boat in New York and then taken on a ferry to Ellis Island, or did you go right to Ellis Island? Do you remember? SHOOCK: I don't remember. I think . . . ( voice off mike ) Why don't you go in the den, Charlie? ( voice off mike ) Well, then don't say anything, because I'm the only one supposed to . . . DANE: What do you remember about arriving on Ellis Island? SHOOCK: I remember there being some sort of wooden platform that we stepped off onto. But that's all, what I remember, then the rest of it I remember very well. Uh, it was the end of the day, sort of not quite dark, but getting dark, and I remember we had stopped, and some questions were asked of my mother. The reason we had, we stayed overnight also because my mother did not have enough money to enter the United States. I think she had to have fifty dollars American money. She had all kinds of Polish and Russian money, which was no good. So I remember her answering questions, we all standing around her, a man sitting at a table. We walked onto like a wooden platform, like, on a wharf, and going into a building. Dingy looking building. And in the corner were piled a blanket. There were a lot of people ahead of us. We were not the only ones. And somehow we were told, each one of us, to take a blanket. Well, I looked at that stack of blankets, I just thought, I'm not having it. It's not, it's dirty. So I didn't take one. We were all marching in, and somebody was telling us which was our bunk. The bunks were like chicken coops, one on top of the other, metal. All metal. The bottom of it I can still, I can still visualize it. It's just like the bottom of a crib, only no mattress. And this was where we were supposed to spend the night, on that. So when I saw that, I went back and took a blanket. And that was the mattress, that was the cover, that was the pillow, and that was, that was everything. I didn't sleep much. I remember I got up and I saw on the floor with my back towards the metal framework, whatever it was. DANE: When you came in do you remember what language the man asking your mother's questions was speaking in? SHOOCK: No, I don't. DANE: Did you speak Russian or Yiddish, or both? SHOOCK: Both, and Polish. In what language my mother answered the questions, when she was asked, I don't know. DANE: Uh-huh. Uh-huh. If you were a TV camera, what else can you remember visually about the room that you came into and where the pile of blankets were? Were there a lot of people there? SHOOCK: Yes. There were a lot of people. It was brown looking, morbid looking. There was nothing there to break the monotony of the dirty, brown color. The metal, the walls, the floor, it didn't look clean to me. It did not look clean. DANE: And the people there, what did they look like, that were coming through the island? Did they have bundles, or suitcases, or? SHOOCK: The immigrants, you mean? Yeah, sure. We did. I imagine they did. I remember the lines, waiting to get in, and once everybody got in then everybody put their bundles down and made ready for bed. DANE: Did you take a meal at the, on the island? SHOOCK: ( she sighs ) Ah, that's a very good question. I do not remember eating there. DANE: The next morning you woke up, you were on American soil. What happened to you that morning? SHOOCK: We all climbed some stairs, went up like on deck. DANE: Inside that room? SHOOCK: No, we left the big room and went, somehow there was some steps, we went up somewhere. Maybe it was the Statue of Liberty. I don't know what it was. Are there steps in the Statue of Liberty? DANE: There are steps in the Great Hall going into little rooms. SHOOCK: Well, no. This, this brought us up into the open where we looked out, and there were platforms below. People were walking, and that's when I saw these people with the funny pointed shoes, and I thought that there was something wrong with their feet. DANE: Why is that? Why was that unusual for you? SHOOCK: Because most of us that come from Europe, I think it's safe to say that, especially the poorer class people like us from the small villages, in the shtels, we were not rich. We didn't have umpteen pairs of shoes to wear. Our shoes were handed down from one to another. And if there were no shoes to be handed down you walked barefooted. In the wintertime I remember that I had a pair of shoes that I outgrew, could no longer wear. So my sister got them. And if I wanted to go outside, not if, when I did go outside, my feet were wrapped in cloth, wound around like bandages, only this must have been woolen or something. And we went out in the snow like that, even. We went to, I went to class like that with my feet bound, so to speak. And here you walk out, I see everybody's wearing shoes, the ladies are wearing high top shoes, I never saw high top shoes before, but the toes are pointy like, like, to me it seemed like the foot only had one toe. And it struck me as being funny, and then, right, along side, walks a black person. I never saw a person other than being white. I never saw a yellow person, a red person or a black person. ( she laughs ) And I was thinking to myself, "Oh, God, what's wrong here? What is, kind of country is this? People have pointy feet, and the people, some people are black." ( she laughs ) There was no one to ask, to answer the questions. DANE: And your brothers, were they out raising Cain, or did they, did you all stick pretty much together? SHOOCK: No, we stuck together. No, we were on our best behavior on the trip. Of course, my brothers didn't associate with, uh, the kid sisters. They went on the roam. They were, uh, my older brother was, if I was ten, he must have been thirteen, and the older one must have been, oh, the older one was much older, because he had run away from home and he was already in the big city, so he positively didn't associate with us. DANE: Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Did you have to do another medical exam? Do you remember that? SHOOCK: I remember more than once. DANE: On the island? SHOOCK: Oh, on the island? No, on the Island I don't remember. I know people were looking in my eyes and, uh, being examined. DANE: How long were you there that day? Did you leave that day, or were you there yet another? SHOOCK: No, we arrived late in the afternoon, sort of, uh, I would say at sunset, because what, when, by the time we entered the big room it was dark. And we spent the night there. The following morning it was nice and bright. The sun was shining. We went out and, uh, then my father cabled them the rest of the money, or telegraphed or whichever way he did it, so we had enough money to get off and get into New York City. DANE: What was that, what were the impressions that, that seeing New York City made on your memory? SHOOCK: Uh, it was very quick. Didn't see, very little, must have been someone there from the HIAS, whisked us away right away to the, uh, station to take a train. Don't remember a thing about New York. DANE: Huh. Subway, did you go on the subway? SHOOCK: Oh, no. No. DANE: Uh-huh. Then you went to Detroit by train? SHOOCK: Yes. Uh-huh. The same day. DANE: The same day. And the train trip, any impressions there? SHOOCK: The automobile made more of an impression on me than the train. I had heard about trains, I had seen trains, but I had never . . . First time I saw an automobile I was still back in my little town of Welin. I don't know how many, how old I was, but I know we were children playing in the street, it was a nice, sunshiny day. Now, you have to remember. We had no newspapers. We didn't know what was going on in the world. This was after the war, you know. Still no newspapers. The only way we got news is somebody went to the big city and brought back news, by word of mouth. So we were playing in the streets, and something came riding down the street without horses. We didn't have no idea what it was. The children. We thought it was a devil. The Yiddish word for this is ahed. That's how we say it, ahed for a devil is riding. We all ran into our homes and hid under the beds. ( she laughs ) That was my first impression of an automobile, and the automobile was there because in our village lived, like, they say the governor, mayor. He had a big house and, uh, if anybody wanted to see him they came to him. That was the only time I ever saw an automobile, and didn't know what it was. Then, when we got off at the station in Detroit, my father, that was a nice looking shiny car, my father came in an open touring car and, like I said, it was dark and thundering and lightening, and here was this strange man that I didn't begin to remember, because I was around three when he left. He's my father, and he wants to kiss me, and I'm shying away. ( she laughs ) And we got into this car and drove over to my aunt's house where we spent the night and the next couple of weeks until we got located in our own home. DANE: Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Jumping ahead a little bit, because I want to make sure I get it, citizenship. When did you, when did it occur to you, or you decided that you wanted to become a citizen? SHOOCK: I always wanted to be a citizen. I loved America from the first day I came here. I thought it was the greatest country. The biggest, my first good impression was the teachers. I came here, I was ten, didn't know a word of English. We wanted to go to school. So my oldest brother, my two oldest brothers, my sister and I were taken to school by a little girl who would speak English and Yiddish. My father couldn't do it because he had to go to work. My mother couldn't do it because she couldn't speak English. So she took us the closest school, which was elementary school, to enroll us. She was the interpreter. My oldest brother decided it's not for him. I think he was seventeen already. He just never enrolled. My other older brother and my sister and I were enrolled. Now, the teacher was talking to us and we didn't know what she was saying. Finally, she got our names through the interpreter, our approximate ages and everything else. I, in the little town where we were born, there were no birth certificates, there were no doctors. So when a child was born you opened up your Bible and you wrote that a child, a girl or a boy, was born on such and such a day. You didn't even have a month or a day, maybe, but you associated it with some holiday. So in our Bible, I was born on a Gentile holiday called (Yiddish), which I think was either Easter or Christmas. I don't know which it was. ( voice off mike ) It was Christmas. Okay, it was Christmas. So when the teacher wanted to have my birth date, I did not have a birth date. So the teacher decided to make my birthday the day that I enrolled in school, which was November the 5th. Then they put us all, the three of us, in the first grade. They skipped kindergarten, they put us in the first grade, and we're sitting in these little desks, and the teacher wrote on the blackboard, she handed each child a big sheet of paper with a pencil, and on the blackboard she was, wrote down, arithmetic, like one and one, we were supposed to write "two" on the paper, and two and two, we were supposed to write "four" on the paper. Well, my brother and I had, my brother had quite a number of years in Europe. I had about two years-and-a-half. Ridiculous. I had had math already. Because in Europe they, you learn much faster than here. So, my brother, my sister had not gone to school, so she was okay, in Europe, so she was okay. My brother and I decided we had to let the children, the teacher, know what we know. So we turned the sheets of paper over, and I did a long division problem. I think my brother did a long multiplication problem, all the way across a whole page. And we just handed it to the teacher. The teacher was smart enough to realize that our handicap was the speech, the language. So as soon as we learned a few words, they skipped us. They kept on skipping us and skipping us. After a year my brother dropped out. He decided it wasn't for him. I continued on, my sister continued on. She also dropped out at the, in, somewhere in junior high school. I continued on all the way on through. I loved, oh, I left something out, in Europe, got to come back to it. I loved school. And I went to summer school. And the end result was that I graduated at eighteen, the same age as the American children started, at six, with only three years of school. DANE: Uh-huh. SHOOCK: I loved school. And the reason I loved school, may I go back a little bit? DANE: Certainly. SHOOCK: ( she sighs ) I left something out. I think it's very interesting. When my father left for America, the second time, and the war broke out, no, the first time, the first time, and he wrote her letters, she could not read them. Because in Europe girls were not educated. Only the boys. The girls did not have to have an education. So she could not read his letters, and someone had to write for her to reply to him. She was a, a strong person, I guess. She went ahead, with her having the children, with having to make a living, she hired a private tutor to teach her how to read and write Yiddish. So she did. When I got to be the age, I think, of seven or eight, my mother decided I've got to go to school like the boys. I didn't want to go to school. After all, none of my cousins went, none of my girlfriends went. For boys! I refused to go. Well, she was bigger than me. So she tied a rope around my waist, and she dragged me to school. And I remember grabbing hold of each tree, of each plank, or fence that I came by, to hold her back, but as I said, she was bigger than me. So she dragged me into class. And I sat down bashful. A roomful of boys, and a man sitting there with a big beard. I had, I never had a father to remember, and I sat there. Well, the teacher must have been some kind of terrific or else I saw a father image in him. I remember he was very kind to me. He didn't call on me, he didn't question me. He left me alone. And I guess he saw that I was showing interest or whatever. In the middle of the day, the first day, I went home for lunch. That was this system. You got there early in the morning, you went home for lunch and you returned, and you stay there until dark. If it was summertime it was a long day. If it was wintertime it was a short day. When I went home to lunch I ate my lunch so fast. I couldn't wait to get back. I fell in love with school and, I think, with the teacher. And I think that has had an impact on me all my life. I loved school, and even though, I don't mean to brag, but after starting school so late, I won awards in penmanship, I won the city, uh, spelling championship from elementary school. I almost got to Washington for the spelling bee. I missed on one word. DANE: Do you know the word? SHOOCK: Yeah, golf. DANE: Gulf, like Gulf of Mexico? SHOOCK: No, it was golf, G-O-L-F. I put an E on it. I don't know why. I spelled it G-O-L-F-E. She said, "Sit down." ( she laughs ) DANE: Did you know what golf was? SHOOCK: I don't think I knew what golf was. I think that's why I misspelled it and I don't know that word was in the, uh, in the spelling words, because that's how I spelled it. I think if it were gulf, water, I would know it, because I would know from my geography. But maybe I didn't know that. Anyway, I didn't. And I also graduated from high school cum laude. Not honor society. Cum laude. So I was definitely scholastic material. ( she laughs ) DANE: Uh-huh. Uh-huh. SHOOCK: And I should have gone on to college, but my father said, "All a girl has to know is how to make a good soup and how to change the baby." So I never went to college. Of course, if it were now, I would have probably gotten a scholarship. DANE: Uh-huh. Uh-huh. SHOOCK: But that was 1928. DANE: Hold on just a second. ( break in tape ) So, the learning English came to you pretty quickly, just a matter of a year or two? SHOOCK: I'm, there was no one to, to tell us what anything means. We just learned by ourselves. There was no, uh, easy programs, we just learned it, I think, the hard way. And we leaned beautifully, all of us. Now, we have accents. I have a slight accent when I pronounce certain words, you've probably already detected it, but there was a speech teacher that went from school to school. She came to the school that I attended once a week and I, when I came here, I could pronounce, the country where I came from, there's no "th" sound, there's no short I, there's no W sound, everything is V. Like, my brother's name was Villiam. ( she laughs ) So she taught us, at least I learned, my younger sister learned, my brother did not. That's one reason he dropped out, how to say "with," and how to say, well, how to pronounce correctly. So that was great. Wonderful. Here are people coming to help you, free of charge. So different from the way it was back in Europe, where we were afraid for our life. The democracy is what got to me, the freedom. I appreciate it, I think, from the first day that I came here, that I could go anywhere I want. Couldn't say anything that I wanted, didn't know how. But there was so much freedom here, and the schooling was free. See, in Europe where we were, there was no schooling free. You paid for it. You had to pay for it. DANE: Uh-huh. Do you remember listening to the radio, or any other teaching . . . SHOOCK: Here? The first radio we got we put something in our ears, and we listened, we took turns listening to it. That was a big excitement. I remember the first TV set. DANE: Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Citizenship. Now you had a birthday, November 5th. SHOOCK: Yeah, right. DANE: When did you decide, or how did you go about getting . . . SHOOCK: You asked me that before. When I married him, he was a citizen of the United States. And since I always wanted to be one, being married to one I didn't have to wait five years, only three months. So I applied for citizenship, and in three months I became a citizen. And also some people here told me, and people are always telling you misinformation. Just like we left the food at Antwerp, I was told in order to become a citizen. But, his family, because when I came here I didn't know anybody here except him. We got married, met in Detroit, got married in Detroit, and two days later I came here. Friends of the family said I have to go to night school. They all went to night school b they didn't have a chance to go to regular school. So I went to night school. After going there four nights I decided I don't need it, I know all that. They were learning basic an history. I knew it. So I dropped out. When it came time to take a test, of course, I took it. And there were twenty-five questions, four parts to each question, and one of the questions was, "What is a duty?" Now, in plain language, we all know what a duty is. Something one must do, right? But they had discussed in class tax, excise tax, which was a duty on import. So I answered the question, "What is a duty?" A duty is something one must do. X. So I got that wrong. ( she laughs ) DANE: Did it matter? SHOOCK: No. I had ninety-six instead of a hundred. DANE: ( they laugh ) Do you remember what it was like when . . . Did you get papers saying that you were an American citizen, your citizenship papers? SHOOCK: Oh, sure. DANE: Was that . . . SHOOCK: I got, uh, like a certificate, which I have till present day, which has my picture on it, and, uh, because I got it, I was happy to get it, and put it away and forget about it, once on my trip to Detroit where my family was, I had my younger daughter with me, she said she wants to go across the river to Canada, so when she comes back, she'll be able to boast to her friends that she was in Canada. So my brother said, "Okay, I'll take you across the bridge, no problem." Getting into Canada is no problem. Canada lets all Americans in, at least in those days. Coming back, America doesn't have open arms. You've got to prove that you live in a. So I questioned the man at the gate before entering Canada. I'm still an American citizen, and I tell him, "I'm just going for a couple of hours. I don't have anything with me to show that I'm an American citizen, which I am. Will I be able to come back in?" He says, "Oh, sure. You come back through my gate, I'll let you in." I come back two hours later and he's gone. ( she laughs ) I can't get in the United States. So they, the other, whoever took his place tells me, asks me, "When did you become a citizen? How did you apply for citizenship?" I'm trying to prove that I know what I'm talking about. He says, "Is there a picture on your paper?" I says, "Yes." He says, "Where on the paper is it? Top, bottom or center?" I didn't remember. So I said, "Top right." It's bottom left. ( she laughs ) But I had, I did have some papers in my pocketbook addressed to me with a Washington address. I guess he saw I was telling the truth. I just wasn't informed well. So he let me in. DANE: Because I want you to respond to it, and make sure I get it on the tape, sort of an overview of your life as an American, as opposed to if you had stayed in Russia, what does it mean to you, having been through that experience and still being able to remember it, to be an American? SHOOCK: It means the greatest thing. I means, just the greatest, because if I had not come to America, I would have been in Europe, and I would have been in the Holocaust, and I would not have been here. I wouldn't have had a family. Like I had a meeting for my club last month. It happened to be sixty-four years since I arrived to America, and I happened to mention that. I, it was getting close to my birthday, and I mentioned that. And I mentioned that. And I mentioned, what else was it, there was four things, my great- granddaughter was starting school. That's only three. What was the fourth one? I remember the fourth one. It makes me happy to know that I'm here. So when I mentioned this to my older daughter over the telephone, what I had said at the meeting, she says, "Mother, I'm very happy that I came here." And so's my husband. ( they laugh ) DANE: Everybody gets something. SHOOCK: Yeah. Oh, this is the greatest country in the world. DANE: Anything, besides your religion, that you brought from Russia with you? Customs, clothing, a style of clothing at the time, anything that related back to the country you came from when you were growing up, or did you leave customs and language behind you? SHOOCK: Oh, no. We did not leave language because we used it here, corresponded with our family that remained there, in that language. The customs, we have. Now, I personally have dropped a number of them. I am not as Orthodox as my parents would have liked for me to be. But I still observe the Sabbath. I still have a kosher kitchen. But I eat out in restaurants. So I say, "My kitchen is Kosher, my stomach is not." ( they laugh ) And, uh, there are a lot of traditions that I still live by. DANE: That are related more to your religion than to . . . SHOOCK: No, not so much to religion. I think it's the family life, like being close knit, your family, and helping the ones that need help. I'm very involved in volunteer work, because there are so many needy people here in America. And, as well as in Israel. I'm an ardent worker for Israel. DANE: Uh-huh. Did you ever think about emigrating to Israel? SHOOCK: No, because I feel that I can be of greater help to Israel by living here and sending them money than by going there at my age. I think that's for younger people. It's a, it's a hard life. And, uh, I think Israel is better off with me in America. DANE: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Let me see if there's anything . . . You're Fannie Shoock now. What were you when you came over? Who were you? SHOOCK: I was Fonia [ph] Bessa [ph] Teitelbaum. DANE: Did it stay that name, or did it get changed? SHOOCK: That's the name that i put down on my citizenship papers when I applied for it. When I came here, they changed my name to Fannie Bessie Teitelbaum. DANE: What . . . SHOOCK: I was nineteen. I was nineteen years old when I got my citizenship