DANE: This is Debby Dane, and I'm speaking with Rose Siegel on Thursday, October 10, 1985. We're beginning the interview at 11:05, and we're about to talk to Rose Siegel about her immigration experience from Russia in 1922 when she was 22 years old. Rose, we're gonna start at the beginning, and if you could tell me the name of the town, and if you remember how to spell it. SIEGEL: ( she laughs ) I don't spell . . . DANE: And where it was . . . SIEGEL: Russia, and the name of the town is Turin, and you have to figure out the spelling yourself. DANE: Uh-huh. And that, when were you born? SIEGEL: 1900. DANE: And your birthday? Do you remember? SIEGEL: Yes. April 15th. That I find out here. I had, I wrote to the, uh, when I came to Washington, I said, I came to Detroit from, when I came to the States, and I, uh, wrote to the, uh, I don't remember what paper it was, that I was born two days before passover and this year, and they figured out the date for me. DANE: Isn't that amazing. That's close to my mother's birthday. In, in your villa, was it a village in Russia that you lived in? SIEGEL: A village. It's a small town. DANE: And did you live . . . SIEGEL: They call it a shtel, okay. DANE: And did you come from a big family? What did your family . . . SIEGEL: My mother had twelve children, but she lost a lot. DANE: Uh-huh, uh-huh. And did they have a bakery, or any sort of business? How did you make a living? SIEGEL: My father had a business. So, uh, and, uh, we used to bake our own bread. Even now I bake, the same as I do there. DANE: And then, World War One came. Did you have any relatives that had come to America? SIEGEL: Uh, yes. I had a brother here, single. And I had a married sister in Detroit, Michigan. DANE: Did they write to you and tell you what it was like? Did you have any ideas? SIEGEL: Yes. They were very happy here until, until the war broke out in 1914. So, uh, we lost contact with, with each other. As a matter of fact, I really don't know my real age because we lost all our documents. Everything was lost. DANE: Were they confiscated, or did you . . . SIEGEL: They robbed, okay? DANE: Uh-huh. SIEGEL: And that happened in, uh, 1918, when they had already the Civil War, the Revolution and then the Civil War, like, every, eery day was a different government. And whoever came in, and then, most of my family was killed. DANE: And at what point did you and your mother decide that it was time to try and get to America? SIEGEL: We didn't decide. We couldn't decide anything. We were just running. I had one sister, that her husband was in America. So she and her three children was, also, we lost contact with everybody. But, when we came, we had to cross the, we couldn't, we couldn't, and we didn't want to leave where we were because my father and my father's brother and his father, that's my grandfather, two sons, born with my father, and two grandchildren, were killed. And everything was, was nothing left. So, uh, we wanted to go to Poland, that was in Russia, and we thought that we would come into Poland, would be easier to get some contact because in Warsaw, Poland, that's called the HIAS, for the immigration, and they used to find relatives, so that's what we were aiming there. So we had to cross the Russian, the Russian/Polish, uh, border. And we came into Poland in a small town, we had some cousins there. We knew that they were there. So, uh, my sister decided that she was gonna go to Warsaw where she could find, maybe they could find her husband and the rest of her family here. And as she was, uh, coming, you have to hire somebody, you know, to, that has a horse and buggy, take to the train station. Now, here in the States, my brother-in-law was drafted into the Army because he couldn't prove his dependents, he's got a wife and three children and there's nothing. So he was drafted into the, and he was off in France during the war. So, uh, automatically, he became an American citizen. And, at that time, the wife and children became American citizens. Well, my sister didn't know, and, uh, as she was going with the driver that took her to the train station, and there is another drive coming across from somewhere else and some people there, and, uh, the driver said to my sister, you see, there is an American delegate, but they, uh, the relatives here used to get together and pick one man, pay his expenses, and maybe he could find their relatives in Europe. So my sister asked the driver, he may want to talk to that delegate, and he did. She went over and she asked him from what town, from where he's coming, what town is the Detroit, Michigan. She says, I have, we have relatives, my husband is there. He says, "What's your husband's name?" She says, "Ben Hanikman [ph]." He says, "Come back in my buggy, he says I have money for you and papers. And my sister still didn't know that the papers are good for her, you know, to go, she could go the same day, just take her children and go. So she still went to Warsaw, and the delegate was there, too. He spend a couple weeks where he was going there and came back to Warsaw, and he had a good time there. ( she laughs ) He find his relatives and they all had a good time. And my sister find out that my brother-in-law, that her husband, give him money, but he didn't give her all the money, and then some more money came in and he kept it. So, finally, when she, when she find out, when she got the address number to write and he asked her if this man gave her the money. So, uh, she went to the hotel, and she said look, I am desperate right now, it's my money or my life. She says I, I am here with my three children. So he got scared. Okay. He gave her the money, my sister went to the HIAS . . . DANE: And he wrote Immigration Assistance Service, I think. SIEGEL: Right. Immigration Service. I forgot, it has a different name. I don't remember. DANE: I know. Uh-huh. SIEGEL: It's called the HIAS. So, uh, she went to the States because it was easy for her. She's an American citizen. DANE: In the meantime were you, had you come to Poland? SIEGEL: I couldn't come with her. So my mother and I were left in Warsaw. So I didn't want to stay in the small town where my cousins were. I wanted to stay in Warsaw, that I could go to the HIAS and they could try more for me. So then my sister came here, and she and her husband, as American citizens, then they could send affidavits for my mother, and I was under age. So I, I was a (?), and my mother, of course. So we came, my sister left in 1921, and in '22, my mother and I came here. DANE: And did you, did they get the authorization through HIAS? Is that how they helped you . . . SIEGEL: Not at HIAS. There she was on her own. DANE: She was on her own. SIEGEL: Right. Because she had, she's an American. DANE: Amazing. That's lucky. SIEGEL: That's wonderful. DANE: Tell me, what did you take with you when you left your village and you knew you were never . . . SIEGEL: Nothing. What, what I had left, what we had left, in Europe when a girl got married, they gave her the wardrobe for the rest of her life, so my, I sold my mother's wedding dress for a piece of bread. That's all I had. DANE: And you could only buy a piece of bread with it. SIEGEL: That's all they gave me. I gave my mother's wedding dress, so the peasant gave me a loaf of bread, I wouldn't say a piece, she gave me a loaf of bread. DANE: And then you were in Warsaw and you got your tickets. Did you buy tickets . . . SIEGEL: They sent tickets for us. See, they used to buy here tickets, if they had cash they paid, if not there was some payment, they paid off. DANE: And then you received tickets and . . . SIEGEL: Then they give you a number in the immigration office, whatever. And when your number is up, then they tell you to get a stamp. I still have my passport. DANE: You do? I'd love to see it. SIEGEL: I'll show it to you. I have to look for it. I put it with other things. DANE: Did you have to see anyone in Poland in the immigration . . . SIEGEL: No, no. Just, just the office of the HIAS. There I went, and they would try to push to get some of the, my, next to leave. DANE: And then where did you leave from? Where did you go from Poland to get on the boat? SIEGEL: Uh, we went to, uh, Antwerp. I guess that's how you pronounce. DANE: Yes. SIEGEL: Antwerp. I believe it's, uh, Belgium. DANE: Uh-huh. Yes. SIEGEL: To Belgium. From Belgium we took, we spent a week there, we had to go through quarantine and all that. DANE: Did they give you medical . . . SIEGEL: Not medical. They just, uh, uh, not exterminate, uh, the clothes that you wear, you have to, I believe it's exterminating. DANE: Yeah. Did they clean it, or . . . SIEGEL: I guess so. DANE: Did they take them away, or did they give them back? SIEGEL: No, they give you, had to wear. DANE: And so you were just kept isolated for a week? SIEGEL: Uh, we spent, not isolated. We stayed in a nice hotel, because that's the, the ship company takes care of all that. DANE: I see. SIEGEL: So they buy the ticket and we had the, uh, some representatives from the company, and they took us as far as Belgium, and then when they took the boat, they went back to . . . DANE: So even from Poland you were with, ended up with a ship representative, and they got you . . . SIEGEL: Sure, because we had to, they, they made up here, from the States with the, because when they buy when you buy your plane here, or your boat, your ticket, your plant ticket, your boat ticket. So, uh, then somebody has to take care. DANE: Do you remember the name of the boat by any chance? SIEGEL: Yes, sure. Lapland. DANE: The Lapland. And do you remember that night, was it nighttime when you left, or day? SIEGEL: We left, uh, in the morning. And I had maybe, maybe a couple hours until they took us for lunch, and then I took sick, I was sick until the day we landed in Ellis Island. DANE: Awful. Can you describe what you can remember about where you slept and what it looked like, and what the ship looked like? SIEGEL: Yes. We were third class, the cheapest ticket you could get. Okay. They weren't rich here, my family, so they, they did what they could do. DANE: Sure. SIEGEL: Okay. so it was third class. I imagine if we had at least second class I would, maybe I wouldn't be so sick, but it was, uh, it wasn't pleasant, but it was still much better what I went through during the war. Okay. When you lose a family it's not easy. DANE: Uh-huh. Were you, what were you feeling when you left Antwerp? Were you excited to get to America? SIEGEL: Right. Very much, very much excited. I, I hated Russia. That's why I get so upset when they talk about Communism the way they, that it's so good there. At that time, I went through both, I had the Czar government and the Communist government, and they were both no good. One isn't better than, uh, than the other. It's worse. Okay. So, uh, I, and then my brother was here, the reason, the reason my brother was here, I told you my parents left five children in Europe grown up. Now, one of my brothers was twenty-one and he had to report to service. So, uh, and he died the day that he was supposed to report. My younger brother, another brother, that he was only seventeen, so by mistake they put the birth, the death certificate of the, of the, they put the seventeen years, they put the, they put the death certificate, and the seventeen they put on twenty-one. So he had to go into service, okay. And if you go into service, which my brother-in-law was, for four years, and when he came back he lost the rights to live in the same town that he lived before. DANE: No kidding. SIEGEL: He had to have a certain degree, a certain business, so, uh, my father decided that instead of going, going in for four years to serve for nothing, and it's less than nothing, so we thought that he should go to the States. And we, and we knew that the United States is better than, uh, because other people left and we heard from them, so it was, so he went just before the war broke out. DANE: What kind of stories would you hear about America, I mean, what kind of news came back about what it was like? SIEGEL: Good. good. It's good. People that went to America, and we found them here, people that we knew, relatives and friends and, uh, it was very good stories, and, and I was, I was anxious, as I say, as a little girl, as soon as I was able to talk and understand a little bit I hated Russia, because you have to be afraid of everybody. Now, the Jews didn't have good then, and it's worse now. Okay, if you read the paper, I don't have to tell you much. So, uh, we were there, all of us were hoping, my father, he would say, what could he do in his age, but he's still, when the children were there, then they would have a chance to come here, too. DANE: And on the boat coming over, where did you sleep? Did you sleep with lots of other people? SIEGEL: Right. Sure. There were a lot of people. DANE: In bunks, or the floor, or . . . SIEGEL: In bunk. No, no, nobody slept on the floor. They had, uh, uh, wasn't private where they slept in, I was on the top. There were double bunks. And some, other girl was down below, and I felt kind of nauseous and she stuck out her head and said how do you feel and I threw up right on her. ( she laughs ) DANE: You can't help it. SIEGEL: I couldn't help it. Okay, but we had a place to sleep, and we were treated nice. I remember the sailors used to come in, and they felt so sorry for me. My mother was healthy. She was, she helped others and I, I was a dead duck. DANE: And, what did people, where did they come from, the other people on the boat? Did you, I mean . . . SIEGEL: From different, they were, uh, when you came, you know, to the port where you have to take the ship, people come from, uh, Russia, from Poland, from different countries, okay? DANE: Did you meet anyone on the boat, or were you too sick to . . . SIEGEL: Ah, no, not on the boat, but in, when I was in Antwerp, there I met people. They were also waiting for their next boat. I met them. DANE: And were most people highly excited, were they . . . SIEGEL: Whoever was there, and I want to tell you, and I'm not exaggerating, whoever was on the boat that was going to United States were happy. I even found, uh, there were, uh, two sisters, they were Gentile girls, and they had all the freedom in Russia they wanted, but they too was happy to go to the United States. DANE: And then finally you got to New York Harbor. Had you been told about the Statue of Liberty or heard anything about . . . SIEGEL: They did, they were talking, and they point out something, and it was exciting. I was excited for every little thing I saw there. I, I was even excited about my bunk that, because during the, the Revolution and during the Civil War I was, uh, in the month of January was the coldest, it was cold all, all winter. And we were hiding ourselves, you know. It was something like the Holocaust, okay. Uh, they didn't have a, like, a Treblinka (?) or Dachau, or something like that, but it was something, we were hiding ourself in the, in the woods and we didn't have to eat any more, how much can you take along when you, when you run around. So, uh, there was a patch of cranberries, cranberries grow in the winter, and they grow down on, you know, on the ground. See, they had other fruit. It's different, but cranberries they grow in the winter and it's on the ground. So I found a patch of cranberries, and that's what we lived on. Okay. So what can I complain when I'm in a place and I'm not afraid, okay? DANE: Wow. Then you came to Ellis Island, did they take you to New York Harbor to the Island, to . . . SIEGEL: To the train. DANE: To the train. SIEGEL: Right. We had to cross by boat. We have to, I, I don't know what . . . DANE: The ferry. SIEGEL: The ferry. That's it. We had to take the ferry to go to New York to get the train to Detroit. DANE: Uh-huh. When you were on Ellis Island, how long did you stay there? SIEGEL: About three days. DANE: Three days. SIEGEL: Three days. DANE: And when you got off, did you and your mother have to, were you asked questions, or did you . . . SIEGEL: No, no. There were not questions. I guess they had to, uh, uh, it's also, they had to. I expect somebody, maybe, if you hear a knock on the door, it may be my grandson. DANE: Okay. SIEGEL: So, uh, and they have to, uh, not exterminate, I can't get the word, I, I . . . DANE: Fumigate? Is it . . . SIEGEL: No. Fumigate . . . DANE: Exterminate, quarantine . . . SIEGEL: Quarantine, that's it. I forgot the word. They have to go to quarantine, so. It wasn't bad. DANE: And do you remember, I remember reading that, um, even during that period they were doing medical exams. SIEGEL: Right. Eyes, especially. DANE: Do you remember that? SIEGEL: I remember, because it was, uh, I don't know what they call it here. In Europe, they used to call it glaucoma, so I don't know what that means. DANE: That's still what they call it here. SIEGEL: Right. So whoever had bad eyes wasn't too lucky. DANE: Did you, were you worried about the possibility about being sent back? SIEGEL: I was. That, this is the main worry what I, what I had, and I worried for my mother because she was old, if they would send my mother back I would go with her. DANE: Did you know some of the reasons they would send people back? I mean, did you . . . SIEGEL: For sickness. If somebody that, if it's a contagious sickness, they would be sent back. DANE: And they, when you went to the medical exam, did they flip your eyelids? SIEGEL: Right, sure. They had to, this they had to do. DANE: Uh-huh, uh-huh. And your mother, did she have any heart problems, or did she just breeze through? SIEGEL: My mother was, she was healthier than I was. DANE: I also read that part, there were medical exams, and that they did ask most people questions about, if they had someone, a relative in the country . . . SIEGEL: Right. You had, you can't, if you weren't self supported, in case you hadn't got anybody to take care of you, and the government, the government didn't want to take responsibility, sure. DANE: Did they ask you if you had money? I also remember there was a twenty-five dollar . . . SIEGEL: That was way before. During this time when I left, or even a couple years before, I went to Canada, when you went, and there when you showed them that you have twenty-five dollars, they let you through, but not in the, not in the, States when I came. With the twenty-five dollars you couldn't, no. But, you see, there was a guarantee, because my brother-in-law was working, my brother was here, and another sister and her husband, so, uh, they knew that the government wouldn't take, have to take care of me. DANE: On Ellis Island, do you remember where you slept in that dormitory arrangement, what it looked like? SIEGEL: Well, I told you, it was, it was a nice room. There were a lot of beds and bunks. And there were a lot of people. There wasn't privacy, but, as I say, we knew, I'm not talking for myself, whoever was there, they knew that they're not gonna get a private room, okay. so you put up for the three days. DANE: And food was there at a concession? SIEGEL: The food was there. The food, the food was all right, whoever was able to eat. DANE: Did you have to buy it, or did you bring . . . SIEGEL: No, no. That was served to us, everything was room and board. DANE: I remember you told me the story about the men that were selling chocolates. Could you tell me that story again? SIEGEL: ( she laughs ) As soon as we went out on the ferry, uh, here are two men, one runs around, carries a big stack of, uh, boxes, of candy, and he gives, you know, like this on both sides, and sells around the candy, so, okay. And I thought it was very nice, they're welcome. And then, uh, from the beginning and he's asking for money and people give him the money, so when he came to me, I got two boxes, one for me and one for my mother, he gave, and he says fifty cents, he said in Yiddish, that, uh, how much. I says, "Did you ask me if I wanted?" He said, "No." That's, uh, in America. I said, "But in America, if you don't want it, do you have to buy?" He didn't know what to say. So I took my mother's candy and my candy and I gave back to him. He said, "You're sure you don't want it?" I says, "I don't have the dollar, you know, for the two of us." I says, "And I like to be asked if I want it. You didn't ask me. You gave it to me." I says, "You gave me a present. I thought you liked me. So, uh." I says this, and I'll say, so the other, the other guys says, quietly, I heard him say, she is nobody's fool. DANE: And did the other people all pay him money also? SIEGEL: No. They wanted the candy so, uh, maybe they were afraid, they thought they have to, but I, I, as little as I knew, I knew that I don't have to if I don't want it. DANE: And that was the beginning of being in America. SIEGEL: That's right. DANE: And having the freedom to say. And what were you waiting on Ellis Island three days for? Do you remember why you were detained? SIEGEL: We had to go through quarantine. DANE: Oh, I see. Do you remember what disease, or what they were worried about, which particular . . . SIEGEL: This is a medical question, and I wouldn't ask, what are you looking for, they wouldn't even answer me. DANE: Other people that I talked to remember, um, seeing certain foods for the first time, like bananas. SIEGEL: Right. Okay. We didn't have bananas in my town. DANE: Did you see them on Ellis Island? SIEGEL: No. I don't even remember seeing them. DANE: Huh. Any other impressions, when you were on the island, of how, what it looked like, or what . . . SIEGEL: Uh, well, I was very much impressed when I saw working men, you know, they're moving around different things, and they wrote gloves. In Europe, the peasants, whatever they did, any hard work, they never wore gloves, and I thought it was beautiful, I thought it was nice. When they took off the gloves, so they're, uh, they're perfect. DANE: Huh. Huh. Were you able to wander around the island, or did you . . . SIEGEL: No. We couldn't. We were on the, in the building, and even in the building we didn't wander around. DANE: Just sat for three days? SIEGEL: well, they, uh, called us for breakfast, they called us for lunch and dinner, so, uh, we didn't have the chance to, and we were, I know I was tired, and I'm sure the rest of them felt the same. DANE: Were you in the Great Hall, that room they call the Great Hall, the huge ceilings . . . SIEGEL: Yes, that's what it was. DANE: Did it seem confusing on the island, going through so many people, or was it orderly . . . SIEGEL: No, but to me it wasn't confusing. I knew it's a building, and I knew that they're bringing in people and they have to be, and I'm sure the others felt the same way. After they tell you, maybe they want to make a bigger story, but this is it. There's nothing to be confused. You were hoping, you were anxious to get to destination, wherever you go. DANE: Once they said it was okay to leave, and they get on the train . . . SIEGEL: Then they told us, they came in, and they gave us, uh, the tickets for, to take the train, and that was all. There was nothing hard. DANE: Were you excited that day when they came? SIEGEL: Oh, yeah, well, you meet, you got your own family, and you came to Detroit, and my, uh, my two sisters and their husbands, and, uh, cousins, a whole group of people came. Cars came up, and I walked into the car. It was excited, and I saw my brother driving a car. DANE: Hold on just a second. This is the end of Side One, talking with Rose Siegel. She's number 66 in our project, and we'll go to side two. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO DANE: This is side two of the interview with Rose Siegel. Debby Dane is asking questions of her. She's number 66. It is 11:40. When you came into New York Harbor and spent those three days on Ellis Island, you were twenty-two? SIEGEL: Yeah. I was full twenty-two. DANE: And did, did you, I mean, you were a young woman, really. SIEGEL: Right. DANE: Did you, remember thinking about New York City and the idea, was it a scary prospect to be going into the city and getting the train, or . . . SIEGEL: No. I wasn't, I wasn't worried about that because, as long as you could talk, and if you talked your Yiddish, in New York there's a lot of them, so I couldn't get lost. Nobody could get lost. DANE: Right. A lot of people spoke Yiddish. So you never felt like you couldn't . . . SIEGEL: No. No. I, uh, I got along with my Yiddish very well. DANE: Did they speak Yiddish with you at Ellis Island? SIEGEL: No, no. There was an interpreter, of some question, but there was no question to ask or answer, so there was, uh, no difficulties. DANE: Uh-huh. Uh-huh. And you didn't need to use anyone from the HIAS? SIEGEL: No, no. The HIAS was, it was arranged already, too. Not, once I got my visa to go to the States, then HIAS had nothing to do. Just from the ship company, that they were the ones that took us to the, you know, until we got the boat, and that was all. DANE: This is a hard question. Do you remember the name of the ship company? SIEGEL: I don't remember the name of the ship. I just know the name of the ship. DANE: That's a hard question. SIEGEL: Uh, uh, uh, tell you about, in Yiddish, that you could get along, there were two little boys, just I met them, in Antwerp (?) Hotel, and one day one of them was crying, and I went over to him and says, "What's wrong with you?" He says, "My father send the papers . . ." His mother died. His father send the papers for the two, for the two boys, and, again, they also send delegate to find them. And he says, uh, he spend the money and he took the money that he was supposed, the two kids was supposed to go, so they spent so much money, that man was supposed to be in charge, that they took his two sisters, he has taken his two sister-in-laws, and they're gonna be left alone and they don't know what they're gonna do. So I went over to the hotel manager, and I told him the story. I says, "Can you, uh, get somebody that I could talk to?" He says, "I'll take it to the office." He had, that takes care. So, uh, I says, "Would you take me?" I says, "I'll pay your carfare." He says, "You don't have to." He took me to, it's a big office. It must also be an extension of the, of the HIAS, and, uh, some gentleman came up and took me into his office and he asked me what was going on, so I told him, I says, "I never saw the two children alone, but now I know they're two orphans, and they have to, the father gave money and the delegate spent their money and he's taking his two sisters." I said, "It would be much better to leave one grown girl here and take the two kids." So, uh, he went back with me to the hotel. He found the delegate, because he stayed in the same hotel, and the two girls, his wife's sisters. And he made a different arrangement. So one girl was left in Antwerp, until he'll come home and get her some money and send for her, and the two kids were going his, to their father in Philadelphia, that I know, I mean, they told me. So, uh, the father met them, he couldn't come into the room, you know, the place that we stayed, but when they went down their father met them there and the sister-in-law, one of them stayed in Antwerp until he'll get money to send for her. DANE: What a wonderful story. Where were they from, the kids, originally? SIEGEL: From Russia. I don't remember from what part of Russia, but they, they were from Russia. And the father was in Philadelphia, and I don't remember exactly what the mother was killed or died a natural death, but they were orphans anyhow, no matter how. So, that happened, on the way, that's what happened to me, and I was glad. DANE: What a nice story. What a good deed. Did you keep an eye on the boys during the ship? SIEGEL: On the ship they had to keep an eye on me. ( she laughs ) But until we get to the, I wasn't worried any more. As long as they got their way to go to their father, then I didn't have to worry any more. If I was well, I would look in and see them, but I didn't see them any more. DANE: And did you see them on Ellis Island? SIEGEL: No. DANE: Did you know about, um, I remember you saying that you were told about the Statue of Liberty, but had you heard that poem that's written on it from Emma Lazarus, you hadn't heard any of that? SIEGEL: No. DANE: And then, you left New York and went to detroit and met, was met by your family. SIEGEL: Right. DANE: Do you remember, you said you saw your . . . SIEGEL: I was that excited when I saw a big car, I remember, it was a Nash, and I went in, into the car, and the relatives, they all followed us, and it was exciting. Because it's your family, you were anxious to see them, so you get excited. DANE: When did you start learning how to speak English? SIEGEL: I learned, I learned from day to day, I learned more in Washington because, uh, when my husband died, suddenly. And, uh, I had to, I was left with three children. My youngest one was eleven months, and the oldest one was eleven years, and my son was seven. The younger one was the one that I just lost, forty-three years. ( she sighs ) And I, I never worked in my life before. I worked for a short time when I came from Europe, but I don't call it work. And I had to make a living, so I started taking in roomers and boarders. And they, they worked in the government, and they all speak English, and I learned more from them, and then when I was in business, when I start catering. See, when, uh, when they start drafting the young men, so, uh, I start moving out on the boarders, too. But I didn't give up and I, I start catering. I had to take like fifty people, a hundred people, I was already worried. But then I used to have three, four and five hundred, and, uh, so, uh . . . DANE: How old were you when you came to Washington, approximately? SIEGEL: About twenty-one, twenty-three, something like that. DANE: So it was about ten years after you'd gotten to Detroit, approximately. SIEGEL: About thirty-two, thirty-three, something like that. DANE: So it was about ten years after you'd gotten to Detroit. SIEGEL: It's about, about thirty-three, I don't remember any more. But, uh, I, I learned here, and, and some English and some Yiddish, and I managed. Put my children through college, and that's why I love it. I told you. I love every, every minute in the day. I love the United States. And when I hear them talking, you know, making remarks, I get upset about that. And especially, uh, a lot of people, they admire Russia, and I don't know what Communism does for them. And I, uh, I told somebody once, I says, if you would go to Russia now, you would come back and be the best American, and they would. You know, I, I can't see, if they got somebody that's working, you know, spying for Russia, I think the, the worst punishment would be for them to send them there and let them live there a little bit, they would be the best Americans, and I keep on, I hope I don't, uh, I don't hurt you. But if I, I, I feel like I am the best American, because I love it. I appreciate. If you don't, you young people, you don't appreciate, really. Because you think it's coming to you, but it's not. And they wouldn't give it to you, you would, you would be on the same boat as I am. DANE: when did you feel that you were an American? SIEGEL: The day I came in. The day I came into, stepped into my sister's house, I feel that I am an American. I told you, I had a sister, she, she died when she was ninety-one. And until her dying day, she would say, if she wasn't ashamed, she would walk on the street and kiss the ground. I would do the same. I love it. And here, look what it's given to us. I choose my president, and if I don't like him I call him all kinds of names, don't you? You call him. So why, why shouldn't I like it. If you would be in Russia with all the feeling that they, that they tell you there, you wouldn't be able to talk like that, you would be in Siberia. DANE: What else does it mean to you to be an American? SIEGEL: The freedom that I have. The children I raise. And I want to tell you something. My son was about, about nine years old. I lived across the street from a playground, school, the Parkview School, if you heard of. And, uh, the Parkview School had a playground, I'm sure they still have it. DANE: That's here in Washington. SIEGEL: Here in Washington. And, uh, there was some young man that used to go to take the streetcar and pass by my house. He must have live in the neighborhood. And he always wore a red tie, and if I would see the red tie I would, I would get scared and I don't know why. One day my son comes home, he says, "Mom, we organized a club on the playground." I says, "Who's in your club?" And he mentions all the kids that live in the neighborhood, and I knew the parents, and I knew the kids. They used to come to my house, and my son would go to their houses. I said, "Well, that's nice." And I thought, for a nine, ten-year-old child, it's better to be on the playground than, than somewhere's else, and I could look in. Uh, I says, "Do you have somebody that's an advisor." "Oh, yes, I have, we have." I says, "Who is he? He says, "He's the one that organized." And I says, "Who is he?" He says, "His name is Bill." "Bill?" I says, "Uh, I would like to come sometimes to your meetings." And I had that boarding house, but I always, I always had time for my children. I talked to them, and we were, like we were brought up together. I says, "Uh, that's very interesting, I'd like to come sometimes to your meeting. Ask Bill if he would mind." And the next day he says, "Mom, I asked Bill and he would be happy to have you." I says, "Good." And I came in and they conduct the meeting, and I didn't like it. I smelled Communism in him. And this is when you teach him, when you get them so young, and you could turn them either way you wanted. And he talked, not direct, but I knew that this is not for me. So my son came home, how did you like it. I said it's all right. I, if I would have to give my children an argument, I didn't do the same day, I let them cool off. A couple days later I sit down and talk to him, I says, "You know something, I'd like to tell you something about Bill." I says, "He's a young man." I says, "He don't know much about it." I says, "What he was talking to you, what he is teaching you, is Communism." I says, "He don't know much about it." I says, "I know. I lived with them. I was there, and I know what I went through. It was very hard." I said, "When you grow up, I says, I hope and pray to God that I should be able to put you through college. Then you're gonna read books, you're gonna, professors will talk to you. And whatever I could think of, I told him. And then, if you make up your mind that's what you want to me, then you're not gonna bet he little boy any more that I have to take you by your hand and go over there, wherever I want to go. Then you're gonna be a man. And a man could make up his mind to be whatever you want to be. I says, uh, let me tell you what I would like to talk to you about, about America. There's a lot of rich people and a lot of poor, and this is a country. And once Bengurian said Israel will become a state when they're gonna be thieves and prostitutes, then he said it will become a state. And this is America. We have to have thieves, we have to have prostitutes, we have to have rich people, we have to have poor people, and all kinds. I said, that's a country. If it would be just one, I says, it wouldn't be a country. We have to have robbers, we have to have everything. i says I wouldn't like to be robbed, I wouldn't like to be killed, but we have to have it. This is, that's how countries are. And he listened to me ( she laughs ) and I see he didn't, he was, he was kind of nervous about it. And I says, "I want you to think about it." I says, "I'm telling you my experience, what I know, what I lived with, what I lived through with." "So," I says, "You'll find, the rest you'll find out later." Well, my son was a big leader then, with the kids. The next day he comes in with three dollars and thirty cents. They used to pay dues, thirty-five cents a week, or something like that. And they broke up the club. And he gave him back his dues what he paid. I said, "What's this?" He says, "I talked to Jeff Friedman, and would he like to talk." And we two decided, and there was another boy, I forgot, Dave, the other one, I don't know exactly the name, and we decided that you were right and they broke up the club. Okay, now I have to have a place for the kids and I feel responsible for the rest of them. We had a neighbor that, there was a couple and two grown sons, I mean, old sons, one of them was already forty-four years old, but he was a famous lawyer here in Washington. Do you have a Kleenex here someplace, can I borrow from you? DANE: Okay. You were saying, what to do with the kids. SIEGEL: I went to my neighbor, he was a famous lawyer here in Washington. He died a couple years ago. I said, "Mr. Goldstein, I have to talk to you. I need your advice. It's important." And they liked us as a neighbor, they liked my children. They happened to be very well behaved. And the neighbors liked them. Uh, I says, "It's very important." And I says, "So far I think I did something good but I, but I need more." He says, "What happened, and I tell him the whole story." I says, "Watch that Bill Stern, when he goes to the streetcar, and you'll see, I didn't like his appearance, and I didn't like the red tie, I don't know why. And he looked at me, he was laughing, he says, "Mrs. Siegel, you are something." I says, "What shall I do with the kids? Now I feel responsible for the rest of them." He says, he was an advisor to a B'nai B'rith group, boys, and the meetings were on Sunday. He says Sunday morning. I call my son by his Yiddish name, and they knew. Even in college, they, all the professors, they don't know one but Fiefala Siepel. He says, "I'll take your Fiefala and we'll go to the Jewish Community Center and he's gonna join the B'nai B'rith boys. Okay. Uh, I, I didn't know how much they are doing, but I know they are not communists. They are, they're Americans. So, Sunday morning, my son got dressed, and went with Mr. Goldstein to Jewish Community Center on 16th Street, and he introduced him to the other kids, and became a member there. And then the whole gang went there. ( she laughs ) I got a lot of members for them. And I could say that all the kids that my son was playing, and then became friends, they all grew up, not because of me, they had parents, too. And, and I knew their parents, nice, responsible people. And they grew up. Nice kids. They, I mean, they have children and grandchildren already. But when I see them, I enjoy them. Very nice, nice families. No divorces. Everything was just nice. And including my son, married a lovely girl, and, uh, I love her, of course, the children, their son that I have a date. DANE: So, the opportunity here in this country is . . . SIEGEL: Right. I couldn't do that, if I, if I could go, if I was in Russia now, and if I would get a bunch of kids and I would say don't, don't be a Communist, I would be beheaded or I, I would be like a lot of them. Why are they freezing there in, in Siberia? Because they're teaching the children Hebrew, they're teaching them religion. And here I am religious, I really am. My house is a hundred percent kosher, if you know what that means. If, uh, uh, when I, when I had a boarding house and if a rabbi came in, the most religious rabbis, and Washington don't have a kosher restaurant, and if they need a kosher meal they were recommended to me. I am a hundred percent, this is my belief. I was catering, and I had black waiters. I never booked anything for Christmas. I respect somebody's religion. I say this, if you believe, if you say that this, well, that you believe in it, and if you believe, then I respect you. And I didn't, and they would tell me, why don't you book something for Christmas Eve, I wouldn't do it. I don't want to be responsible for somebody else's religion. If they do somewhere on their own, it's their business. But I wouldn't do it. And if they want to observe their holiday, then they have to, they're entitled to. DANE: Was the catering business kosher, too? SIEGEL: Kosher. One hundred percent kosher. Right. I wouldn't go to a Reformed Temple, because Reformed Temple they don't observe kosher the way I, the way the Orthodox okay. And I never, I never booked anything there. I went to all the synagogues, conservative and orthodox, but I never went to the Reformed Temple. I accept them as Jews, it doesn't make no matter what you are, but they are, they are Jews, and I like them, like, some of them are my friends. ( she laughs ) Okay. but, I, uh, I was a hundred percent kosher. DANE: And, when you say, called your son by his Yiddish name, is, Rose can't be your Yiddish name? SIEGEL: No. My Yiddish name is Roshka, but they changed here for, they called me in Europe to Rosa, in Russia. So, uh, that's the only change. DANE: And what was your maiden name? SIEGEL: Hoffman. DANE: Hoffman. SIEGEL: Not Hauptman, but Hoffman. DANE: Got it. And could you spell the Yiddish, your Yiddish name? SIEGEL: In English? DANE: Yeah. SIEGEL: No, you can't. It's a different, uh, spelling, you . . . DANE: Say it again? SIEGEL: Hoff, my name? Roshka. DANE: Roshka. SIEGEL: Okay. How, can you spell it? It would be R, S-H . . . It's hard. DANE: Did your mother call you Roshka? SIEGEL: Yeah. I had a cousin here, and he loved me a lot. We were just, practically raised together. See, his father was killed and my father was killed. But, not only for that. And he never called me Rose, Roshka. He loved it. And he's got a son, they're big builders in Chicago and, uh, Phoenix, Arizona. They build a lot. And his cousin, his son, he's dead already, my cousin, but his son, when he comes to Washington, they had builders here, there's a convention there, but they're, on the, phone, hello, Roshka. He loves to say that. DANE: Do you like that? SIEGEL: He likes it, and I like it too. But, okay, call Rose, you know, the spelling is, uh, different. DANE: Citizenship, how and when did you become an American citizen? SIEGEL: Uh, I became a citizen, I had my, see, my husband was a citizen, but I couldn't become because of him because I married in, uh, '24, 1923, '24. So, uh, his second papers are my first. See, you take out the first papers, and then you wait a couple years, and then you take out the second papers. And then my husband died, as I say, suddenly, and I didn't have a chance to apply yet for my second papers because I had the children one after another and, and I met Samuel Gompers, he was the chief clerk at the State Department. And I also met him through, through, through a tragedy, I would say. One of his brothers, Henry Gompers, had a monument place on 14th and U Street, and I had to, my husband died, and I had to order the monument for my husband. And Henry Gompers got a heart attack, and he was home, and his manager, when I picked up what I wanted and he gave me the price, and I agreed, and when Mrs. Gompers checked the contract, and she saw that they made a mistake in fifty dollars. Well, she came to me, she says, I'd like to tell you something, but you do what you please and we're still gonna be friends. Henry and I looked through the contract, and he made a mistake in fifty dollars, supposed to be fifty dollars more. If you want to stick to it, we have nothing against you, it's our mistake. I said, to her I'm not a rich woman, but if my husband could talk, he wouldn't want it, and I don't want it either. It was, uh, three hundred and fifty dollars. So, what's another fifty dollars, even, that money meant a lot to me, because I was left penniless. But I, I couldn't, my conscience would bother me. I says, I agree, with the fifty dollars more. I want to pay that. It was a mistake, I says. I don't want to get the fifty dollars because Mr. Gompers is sick. Well, when Samuel Gompers used to visit his brother every Saturday, and when he came to visit him, and his brother and sister-in-law told him what I said, he says I'd like to meet that lady. So, uh, the following Saturday ( she laughs ), he called me, and I went to, they lived not far from where I lived, I went down and I met Samuel Gompers, Jr., and, uh, we were talking there, and we had a little argument in different ways. See, they are Jewish people, the Gompers, you know that. But they are already, there were a lot of intermarriages, and Mr. Gompers made a remark that I didn't like it. Uh, he, they had a Ladies Night in the Masons, they had a Ladies Night and a lot of people came in with their wives, and they were giving out candy and the, and the ladies were grabbing the candy and he says I, I was embarrassed. I says, "Why were you embarrassed? Why should Jewish ladies grab the candy?" I says, "I'll tell you what you do. You have a Ladies Night in another lodge, where all the gentile ladies will come in." I says, "When you give out candy, and if they're gonna stay like this." ( she crosses her arms ) I says, "You're making a big mistake. They'll take, they'll stretch out their hand, too. So he looks at me and says, "You know something? You're a straight shooter." He says, "You know, I am not much of a Jew." I says, "They belonged to the Reformed Temple." I says, "Mr. Gompers, I'm gonna tell you something. God forbid, if Hitler should come to the United States, you're gonna be the first one in concentration camp." I says, "I'll hide myself, but," I says, "you're gonna be the first one in concentration camp." I says, "I'll hide myself, but," I says, "you're Samuel Gompers, Jr." I says, "They'll find you. He'll find the others, too, but especially if they know that you're not a hundred percent Gentile." "Well, then," he says, "I like you." Okay. And then, we were talking about different things, and he did ask me if I was a citizen. So I told him that I started to go to school to get my papers, but I would have to wait another three years. He says, "You come Monday to my office." So I went Monday to his office, and he introduced me to somebody and I got my papers in three days. It isn't what you know, okay, this is another thing, could I, if I was in Russia, could I come up to a man like him? Never. And then he and the Gompers died. Well, Mrs. Gompers became a very good friend of mine. Like, when I had to go every Saturday to visit them, uh, she told me that Henry died, and before he died, he mentioned my name. He wanted to see the little girl, the little girl, that's my baby. But she says, "I didn't want you to see him. I wanted you to remember Henry the way he was." But, uh, he died on a Friday and, uh, she cannot get any clothes for the funeral. Well, I knew some, yeah, I knew somebody, that she had a private store on 14th Street. I says, "Let me try that Holly Iknik." I called up, I says, "Can you fit out a bunch of people in black clothes?" And she said yes. I called Mrs. Gompers, and she dressed them all up. One day she called me, she says, "You have to come to my house tonight." The Masons performed some kind of a prayers and everything else. She said you don't have to go to an opera. So, i went there, well, when I walked into the house I thought I was in a garden. Flowers were from the floor to the ceiling, and I not opera going. But, to see them perform, to be there, they performed just like you're in an opera house. Okay. Then the funeral has to be a couple days later. I went down with a neighbor of mine, he was a Mason. And it was from their home. And I, uh, I see Mr. Gompers, Samuel Gompers, he came, take me under my arm, he says, "You're gonna be with us." And they have another brother somewheres in Massachusetts, and the whole family, and he put me down, he introduced me to everybody, this is a friend of ours. And I was sitting with Mr. Gompers, and there was a reformed rabbi, Rabbi Simon, and he's giving the eulogy, and Rabbi Simon gets up and he says before I go any further, the Gompers family, yeah, I told Mr. Gompers at the time, I says, if you're gonna deny yourself that you're a Jew now, never mind when you die. And Mister, Rabbi Simon gets up and he says, "Before I start anything else, and I want to tell you that the Gompers Family is a pride to the Jewish people, and Samuel Gompers lean and says, "You were right." I says, "You bet." DANE: That's great. ( she turns to the recording engineer ) Is there any tape left? This is the end of side two, interview with Rose Siegel, done on 10/31/85. She's number 66. It's 12:30 PM.