DALLETT: My name is Nancy Dallett and I'm speaking with Kate Simon on Monday, June 2, 1986. We're beginning this interview at 4:25 pm and we're about to interview Kate Simon about her immigration experience from Poland in 1918. This is the beginning of side one of Interview Number 180. Can we start back at the beginning of your story. SIMON: The beginning of my story is that I was looking for my father, who left when I was probably not quite two. My mother was pregnant with my brother, who had not yet been born. So, no, no, since he's a year and a half younger than I, I must have been a year old, right? DALLETT: Must have been. SIMON: Figuring pregnancy, so I was very young but looking for him. And we lived with my grandmother and a gaggle of very pretty aunts, I have some pictures, all of them with roses at the side of their necks around a collar band, that was the fashion. And my mother was the, I would think, the financial mainstay of the family. She had a corset shop. And Warsaw was then the sort of small Paris, and the corset shop meant that you had, I'm remembering her memories, if you, I wasn't there really. It meant that you did very well with actresses and singers and women who were called actresses. And it was a lucrative business and she supported most of them although they all worked. When my brother was born, shortly after my brother was born, the situation in Europe was such that although she had money, not a great deal, it was not possible to buy him an orange, milk, anything to grow on. We had potatoes I suppose, of course we had bread and I may have gotten a better start or may have been just simply sturdier. I've been told I would have been a taller woman had I been fed more properly at the time, but I survived. He got rickets. He survived too. I don't know whether you know what rickets is because it's an obsolete disease like leprosy or bubonic plague. Big head, rather dangling arms, though usable, but absolutely no power in the legs. So he spent the first two or three years of his life shuffling on his behind and what I do remember about him was that he compensated by being enchanting, a marvelous little liar, a manipulator, all the kids, all the things a bright kid does when he can't do other things. And of course sympathy, sympathy, sympathy all the time. And anyway he was a great crier, one of the monumental criers. Now, all this produced in me a kind of maturity, a very premature, abnormal maturity. I had to take care of him. My grandmother did, my aunts did, but as in the lives of most immigrant little girls, the first little girl at any rate, she becomes the surrogate mother instantly. This is something you're born with like the color of your eyes. So I had to take care of him a great deal and my memories of my taking care of him become particularly frightening when we began to travel. Either my father had sent or my mother had accumulated the money. Oh, the bitterest memory of my mother is that she was told by a doctor, she went to many doctors, "Leave the boy here to die, take the girl." Now this may have had enormous effects on my life, vis-a-vis my brother, for the rest of our lives. "Take the girl, let him die." At any rate she didn't and I had to take care of him. I had to take care of hi, in places that I dream about. Very strange apartments with heavy, heavy, heavy furniture. Might be German, might be Austrian, I don't know because it was a long journey by various vehicles, I don't know how, I think some of them were wagons, some of them were trains. You must presuppose a war-torn Europe, and we were crossing from Warsaw to Rotterdam, a fair distance. So that any number of vehicles, and a good deal of walking, I think, was involved. And we had to carry him, or I carried the bundles and my mother carried-- And the bundles consisted almost always-- I'm giving you some classic details by the way, including the rickets, classic in the sense that it's a story that appears and appears and appears. On of the bundles must have been immense, it was a huge bedcover, and I don't know if there was Jewish family from cold countries that didn't have one. Those became four or six or eight blankets, they were that heavy. We didn't carry a samovar because we weren't Russian, the Russians did. We didn't carry candles because we weren't religious, although many religious people carried something like even a menorah. And as I say, I dream of very frightening places with very large, heavy furniture, and always the feeling, "Is she coming back? He went away, will she come back?" And the need, which is also very real in my memory, of consoling him. He was frightened, and I could no longer afford to be frightened, I was the surrogate mother, and I had to keep a straight face and tell him that everything was going to be hotsy-totsy, while I was terrified. I don't remember the voyages, I do remember the arrival at a long dock, a cobbled dock where there was a ship, the ship called Susquehanna, which somebody told me made only that voyage. I don't know why. One of my contemporaries whom I met at a party said, "You know that was the only time the Susquehanna sailed." I said, "What happened to it?" He said, "I don't know." And at the pier, some woman gave me a fishcake or my mother bought it for me. I have never eaten a fishcake since. I'm not sure that it wasn't terror that made it taste so odd, it was probably perfectly alright except that-- Also I think I was very much afraid of strangeness, strange food. I met many languages, which gave me, by the way, a facility for being a charlatan in accents. I could make any accent you like, (they laugh) without necessarily knowing the language. Then onboard ship came the next classic, typhus. Which was as you know a disease carried by lice, mainly. And we came steerage of course. I'm not sure those ships had anything but steerage. They were great big boxes, as many people as they could shove in. So my mother had typhus, and there I was with that kid again, and what to do with him. Of course, people helped and the one very vivid memory, besides the, it was no longer terror, I was becoming confident that I could handle, things because I was always scared. Could I handle whatever might appear? But I do remember a man, a man with a limp, in a brown hat, who played, who gave us and played with us with an India rubber ball. Does that mean anything to you? An India rubber ball was round, slightly smaller than a football, and all colors. The most beautiful thing I ever saw, and I don't know why they don't have them. But it was a multi-colored ball, fairly round, but all around fairly large, and very common then. And I was in love with that man, probably all my life,to some degree or other. He appears to me as probably the noblest and loveliest of the experiences. Then came the terror of, "would we be exclude?" Because of my brother's rickets. They were then excluding for specific, trachoma, I think, tuberculosis, but we didn't know. Apparently rickets was so common, they didn't even consider it a disease, but that was terrifying moment. And I remember clinging to my mother, moving, moving very slowly, and voices calling, calling other people. I have a very story in that story that I wrote about voices and names not being recognizable because they'd been Americanized. If you're told to look for a hoola, and somebody else, "Henry is looking for you," and you've been told that any man who looks for you, whom you don't know, is going to take you to Buenos Aires to a brothel, that was the favorite source of terror to young girls travelling alone, and some did. At any rate, we got through. Now after that-- I don't know how much more you want after that-- DALLETT: Anything else about Ellis Island that you recall? SIMON: We were met by my father, who of course looked like a god. He was a good-looking man, but the fact that he existed, when I had doubted his existence, that he was so magical because everything we were told, everything we complained about, and we didn't complain much. You learn early what not to complain about, what;s fruitless to complain about, was that he would fix everything, from my brother's legs to the fact that I wanted a doll, that life would be very beautiful. He was America, he was the Statue of Liberty as far as I was concerned, and absolutely gorgeous. And while he was waiting for us, he'd been munching on chocolate, he'd had no lunch, or he didn't want to leave whatever line or line-up he was standing on, and when he did greet us, I said he had a sweet mouth. I've always taken that to mean that I was courting him. "Be nice to me, be nice to me, be nice to me." Also the pleasure of seeing him, but i was afraid of him as well. Strange man, have to say something nice. And that is all I remember about Ellis Island. I remember a great deal about settling in but Ellis Island finishes at that point of seeing my father as a god and trying to make him a good god, somebody I could trust. After that we come to the relatives, and that really is part of Ellis Island, in a way. My father had an old uncle, very lively, nice old man, sort of Old King Cole type who had wonderful tricks of putting his fingers in his cheek and making noises. And two impaired daughters. One, very lively but practically blind, very poor vision, and the other one a deaf mute. And that was a wonderful introduction to America. How you live with an enthusiastic woman who doesn't see you. Her contact was of course, she caressed, and caressed, and caressed, and caressed. The other one was silent, remote, and very capable. She'd learned how to pluck a chicken very well, she had vision. So between them they managed the household pretty well, but for us it was very strange. Also their Polish had deteriorated. Now, I don't know where they came from, my father was not from Warsaw and the original Polish might have been corrupt or not very good. But we didn't understand each other. So that when my mother and father went out, she couldn't wait to see this marvelous America, I could not teach them the difference between sleeping and going to the toilet. And my poor brother would cry his word for going to the toilet and they would put him to bed, get him into bed and he would cry, and cry, and cry. So I would have to drag him to the toilet. It was very difficult situation of communicating. But then we moved and again you had to have the third classic, there are many more, but in my mind we took in borders. I'm going beyond Ellis Island, I don't know if-- We took in borders, people you fed, people you gave room to, and by this time my brother was walking. It took him a very short time to recover, all he really needed was maybe six months. He never quite lost, not never, but for a long time, he jabbered and jabbered very charmingly, and was very easily capable of feeling sorry for himself. It took him a long time to lose that. And then the most pleasurable thing I remember, my father in spite of the sweet mouth and Olympic look turned out to be a little difficult. Now he had a common difficulty, a handsome man. earning decently for a year and a half, with an eye for the ladies and they for him, he'd had a wonderful time. And there he was with an attractive wife, but still a wife, and two kids. He never liked us, never forgave us, I don't think. So life was very, very, difficult, had to watch every word you said, or you were punished-- We had been indulgently brought up by my grandmother and aunts, as indulgently as they could manage, but we were not reproved for everything. We were not criticized for everything. He had a Prussian attitude towards, "You've got to do what I say, whether it makes sense or not," and that was extremely difficult to cope with and I think I started growing angry with him then and stayed angry. But I do remember with great pleasure when we lived on East 98th Street between Third Avenue and Lexington, there were two or three tenements at the top of the street,Lexington, but down below there were small houses in which there were blacks living. They must have been not terribly respectable houses, not like, they were respectable. They were certainly not rich houses, they were slum houses but small. And I do remember with immense pleasure the way the kids ran and screamed which we weren't allowed to do, and the way they would suddenly gather under religious banners and march up and down the street singing. A very happy thing to watch, to listen to, to know. This was the better part of America, rather than the father. Then of course came the great big, big, big change, which was itself an immigration actually, when moved to the fresh air and the new schools of the Bronx. And that really is the end of that chapter. Then you have other adjustments, like neighbors, neighborhoods, liberals, movies. It was another life. I think it was the relatives and the first picture of Black joyous kids running up and down the porches of their houses, and the banners and the religious-- My brother and I sang their holy songs, or what we thought, imitating them, when my father wasn't home, marching with kitchen towels. As I remember it now, we were singing some version of Holy Lord, because it came out in us as, "Olly nolly, olly nolly," and I can't imagine it was anything but "Holy Lord," and it was a set of religious processions. That's all I can tell you about Ellis Island. "Why did he go away?" And even though the explanations came with maturity and we understood, (she whispers) we never liked him, never quite forgiven him. DALLETT: Do you actually remember the explanation at the time from your mother? Why he went? Where he went? SIMON: No, my mother never was angry because he went away. This is the story about the people. I think as far as my mother was concerned, I think she might have been just as happy in her shop in Warsaw, which was taken away from her by the way, had she been allowed to keep it and work in it. Because all her life, she wanted to go back to work, and she did. One way or another she learned the language, she went to school, and did go back to work when we were in school, when we were in classes. So I have no strong feeling that he was the big attraction. The big attraction was food, and our welfare. DALLETT: How was it that you began to pick up the language then, was that in school? It doesn't sound like it was in the neighborhood so much as-- was your father-- SIMON: My mother and father made it important to become Americanized, a little bit of which I resent because there's no reason why I shouldn't have known Polish. I think they both knew some Russian. No, the first language I learned was Yiddish, because that was the most common language in the street and in the houses and my parents spoke with each other, both Polish and Yiddish. And I learned English very rapidly in school because I wanted to, and also was very careful to imitate what I thought was the best sounding English. That came from the librarians. Librarians were goddesses and they spoke and I imitated their speech. Few Teachers but the librarians were the pure, pure academicians of language. DALLETT; What did that mean, to, well first to your parents, let me ask, to become Americanized? What did that mean to them? SIMON: Well, one thing I do remember which had part of Americanization, although it had other elements, was that shortly after we arrived, my mother on Friday night would put on the ladies' prayer shawl and lit the candles and blew out the candles and took off the shawl. Another time, another place. She's a very independent person and one of the few people I know who is really an empirical thinker. She didn't have to do it to please her mother, there was no point. So that was one. The second was going to the library classes. I don't know if you know that the Public Libraries gave classes in English. Almost instantly, as soon as went to school, establishing herself in classes and continuing. That was her Americanization. She talked English, although in the beginning not too well, and with an accent, she always had some accent, without fear. The Italian women never spoke English, many of them. They were afraid the wouldn't be understood, they were afraid somebody would make fun of them. She had the confidence to try and in trying, of course, learned a great deal, accomplished a great deal. My father read, he read the Yiddish newspaper, but he also read, must have been the Daily News. Is the Daily News that old? Maybe it was the Graphic (?). But he read the American newspapers. He also became very much interested, there was no Zionism in the family, no sense of, "Let's return to the homeland." That was an Arab hole and he wanted nothing to do with it. But he was very much interested in the Union Movement which was then beginning of the Coalition of the A.F. of L. and C.I.O. and that he read, followed in the Yiddish and English papers. They both became Americanized in buying records, opera records largely. He was rather knowing and had a most sound response so that was another piece of Americanization. And of course she did the great American thing of buying household objects from an Arab peddler for 25 cents a week, that was part of being American. And also, we had the advantage of living in a mixed neighborhood. DALLETT: What was the mix? SIMON The mix was largely Italian, and Jewish and everything else but Black and Chinese. And one of the interesting things to me and it still interests me, as a traveler in Italy, was the fact that the southern Italians would have nothing to do with the northern Italians, if they were in trouble they went to the Jews. I learned some of the most obscene language from the Italians when they fought. I didn't realize how obscene it was until I got to know the language. But my mother also had an interesting relationship with the Italian women in that some of the girls were very young when they married, the Italian girls, utterly unprepared for marriage, childbirth. They didn't know what happened to them, they didn't know, they had crossed and an ocean, the whole thing was a terrible nightmare. A kind of dumb, fatalist life, like an animal's, you know. And they would malfeed their kids or not handle them intelligently, and my mother became the convulsion lady. She would never let me go with her. I never knew what she did, but I think what she probably did was reduce the child's fever with cold water or something very simple and calm the mother. But we'd get calls in the middle of the night, "Convulsion lady." My father hated it, he thought she should mind her own business. DALLETT: This is the end of side one of Interview Number 180, with Kate Simon and it is five o'clock. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO DALLETT: This is the beginning of side two of Interview Number 180 with Kate Simon. I was asking you before what it meant to your parents to be Americanized. Did they have a vision for you, how you would become Americanized? SIMON: My father had a vision of my becoming a typist and secretary and earning a living, fast! My mother had visions of my going to school. She had one year of schooling on which she managed to learn a good number of languages, reasonably well. She is one of the tragic facts of many female lives. This was an extraordinary intelligence that never had an opportunity to develop. She developed on her own as much as she could. She played the mandolin wee. She learned the languages she wanted to know fairly well. But this was the kind of woman who would now get a scholarship at a good college you know. She wanted me very much to go to school and that was not an ambition of her tribe. She also, to the point of, which is probably a reflection of her disappointment in marriage, didn't care whether I got married or not, didn't think it was important. It was very important to know how to keep yourself before you married so that you could have choices because she was, after along line of centuries, centuries of women who had no choice, like Daniel Deronda, you become a governess or a wife or if you're lucky a courtesan. And she wanted me to be able to keep myself before I succumbed to any of the other possibilities. DALLETT: How about your own vision? Did you have an idea of what it meant to become Americanized? Was that something you wanted for yourself? Did you reject how your parents thought your life should go? SIMON: The phrase, "Becoming Americanized," never occurred to me. You're too busy living, too busy learning everything; habits, languages, people, places. You thought about a lot of things like sex, and the attitudes of people toward you, your attitude toward them. But I never thought of becoming Americanized. I was here and I was going to do what I could do, when I could do it, in the light of what I wanted. But it had no label. Did you get people who felt they were consciously being Americanized? DALLETT: Yes, yes. SIMON: No, I knew I spoke English well, quite early, I knew I wrote well, quite early. DALLETT: So it wasn't anything like feeling an outsider, or was it? SIMON: As I said, I think, before, you're always. always an immigrant somehow, but it didn't mean that I had to become Americanized. The struggle in adolescence is to become "me." Finding out in a thousand different ways, and with a hundred affections and so on and so forth, who you are. But the only, only thing, the only situation in which I felt very strongly, "them" and "I," was that in those days, if you applied for a job, you had to put down religion. Now we were not religious but I damned if I was going to not put down Jewish if I was asked, not Protestant or Catholic or whatever it was. That was the only sense of not being Americanized, in that I was not of a majority. But otherwise, I had no sense, I'm reading the New York World and FTA and I'm becoming Americanized. It was FTA and it was the wit, the learning, and the enlightenments that I felt I could have gotten in any language had I wanted to. DALLETT: You were talking about that period when you moved and I'm not sure what neighborhood you were talking about, where it was in the city, I think maybe it was the Bronx. SIMON: Yes, I was brought up in the Bronx. My earliest years, the early important school years, for instance, were in the Bronx. DALLETT: Can you just give a flavor of that neighborhood? That sounds intriguing. And that period in your life when things started to gel and sort of in terms of going to school? SIMON: Yeah, it was essentially two streets, bordered by Croton Park, which was a very nice park at the time, and a large Borough Hall I think. And the Borough Hall also had that quality of "them." If we ever had to be taken to Borough Hall we were in trouble, citizenship trouble, the cops, something terrible, truant officers. It was a very neat and lively tenement area, very well kept by janitors who were Polish and had little white poodles. That's all I can tell you about the janitors. They were very lively Romanian and Hungarian ladies who were not as devoted, the other ladies said, as the Russian and the Italian. The Italian mothers were the most devoted because they never went out. They were warm stoves. They were always there. That was not an act of devotion in the volitional sense but it worked out that way. The Jewish mothers were more interested in the achievements. The Italian kids, for instance, used to have wine for lunch and sleep through the afternoon. And I thought they were wonderful. I was so envious of this pagan life, and it was an antique pagan life. But the Hungarian ladies,who were very good cooks, they were good bakers. And one of the memories that's very, very vivid, is I used to like to get up very early in the morning before schooltime and watch the street wake up, my street. All those people belonged to me, me, me, at some point. And see the men in their caps and their brown paper bags, walking, usually singly and slowly, towards the elevated station. There was the Third Avenue El at the time. And on one corner there was the candy store which was the summer meeting place. We bought ice cream once on Friday night. And at another corner there was my tree. There was one tree that had white blossoms, I still don't know what it is. That was me, my tree. This all sounds infantile, and it is. I think kids do have that sense of "my neighborhood, my people, my tree." And on another corner there was grocery store run by a very old Jewish couple with whom I had trouble because although I could speak some Yiddish, I couldn't really explain myself, maybe they were deaf. There was a small Synagogue on the next street. Two blocks up on Tremont Avenue, which fronted Crotona Park. There was a temple, Belmont Movie House, where you went every Saturday at one o'clock. And there was always some adult who would buy you a ticket. The rule was that kids couldn't go in alone, but there was rarely more than two adults in the movie house. It was full of kids, who sat, and sat, and sat, as long as they were permitted to, until some parent came and said, and it announced from the stage, "Molly, go home now!", you know. And then, of course, there was the best place of all, which was the library, and that was, that we used to do on skates, on Saturday. We'd go like an army on wheels, down Tremont Avenue, in hordes and left our skates, no one ever thought of stealing. And it was a great adventure. We could take two books, I think, and the librarians were terribly nice, and the idea that there were all these books, and again they were mine. And I had the privilege of reading, was very exciting. And then when there was a movie house, that was more elaborate, a little further away on Tremont Avenue, that had vaudeville, which embarrassed the hell out of me. I couldn't stand it. Even at that age I knew how inept they were, how bad the voices were, and of course my mother took me once. I think it was a big celebration, to see the "Gold Rush" there, and I cried from beginning to end. It was the saddest picture I ever saw. So she never took me back there again. And that was the end of my vaudeville, rich vaudeville, movie days. And then there were the schools, the schools from which you progressed to the sixth grade and then the eighth grade and so on and so forth, all within a few blocks. The only really distinctive, different place, which I've been told has become very elaborate now, was a market about three or four blocks north on the adjoining street, Arthur Avenue, a good Italian market. And now apparently a wonderful Italian market. It hasn't succumbed to any of the changes that have gone on in the neighborhood. But mostly it was tenement on one side and the small Italian houses on the other side. And I could not always tell the difference between the Jewish families and the Italian families. They all made the same noises, in different languages. They slapped their kids the same way. They caressed them the same way. Except that the Italian families had a grandfather who grew tomatoes. (They laugh.) That was a marvelous thing, that was their great distinction. DALLETT: You mentioned before, the man, I think he was on the ship, who gave you the India rubber ball. Are there any other people from this later period that stick out the way this man does, from your memory? SIMON: Oh, the later period? Dozens. I wrote a book about them. I don't know whether you read Bronx Primitive. All those people stick in my mind and I've never forgotten them. The Santini's, who I understand are still functioning, whether they are functioning on that street or not. But the man who showed us dirty pictures. Our janitor who used to curse us in Polish, with her little white poodle. I think the candy store lady and I think there was a grocer's near the candy store where the boys used to steal potatoes and bake them on an empty lot which ran between two streets behind us. And of course the factory which I mentioned. We were near a hat factory, the blue, the most beautiful colors, the dyes came out, the reds, pinks, oranges, yellows, all lovely. Of course sleeping on a fire escape which was an immigrant experience, or-- Now this was a very interesting thing, I was talking to a man who came when I did, in the same way that I did, and he thought that it was one of the most humiliating experiences of his life to sleep on the roof when it was hot. I remember it as extraordinarily beautiful, dark and all the white sheets and people sitting in little groups and talking quietly. And this always gave me a very interesting piece of recollection to reflect on, his hating it so, and my thinking it was absolutely wonderful. It kind of divides humanity in one way or another. And all those people in Bronx Primitive were for real in my sense. Whether it was real from their sense I don't know. And the sex on the roof, and the dogs. The one thing I think that was another great advantage to our growing up, besides the fact that we had to learn to be stubborn, and strong and willful to exist, and, was the streetlife. It was a very honorable society. You could lie to your mother and father, or anybody, but you did not lie to each other. And there was a good deal of trust and a good deal of interdependence. It was a very clearly established and well functioning society which I'm sorry doesn't exist anymore. I think "block life" life wa absolutely wonderful. You didn't have to be amused. You'd go downstairs on a warm evening and you'd find eight friends, ten friends and something would happen. And I think it's so sad that that's almost altogether gone. What we have now in block society is gangs, vicious gangs, we had none of that. A couple of boys from next street that would say dirty words to us or something like that, but nothing that was menacing. A lot of it was strengthening. And also I think what was very strengthening, besides the block society, was that nobody ever told us we had to be happy, no one ever promised us that. I think that was a great boon. Because there were not happy people, they were not unhappy. Some of them were very merry, but they didn't think in terms of, "Am I happy, will I be happy?" This is life. And it had to be lived. And you take what you can get, and you endure what you have to endure. And I think this may be true of many, many, many immigrants, whether they've expressed it or not, that a recognition-- You see, so many American children are brought up from the very first day with the sense that everything should be directed at making them happy. There's no recognition of the fact that you feel bad at times, and you have to feel bad at times, that it's part of feeling good at times, you know. But we had that, and when we felt good, we felt very good (she laughs). DALLETT: In your books, in your attempt to preserve those feelings about that period, was it an effort to really capture something that you feel has really been lost, and that things are really different? SIMON: Oh, they are terribly different. Terribly, terribly different. DALLETT: Did you feel at the time, that it was a universal immigrant experience that you were relating from that period? SIMON: You mean while I was working on it? Ah, yes, yes. What I did in a certain sense was open a stage, pull the curtains away, and there were all the characters waiting to be, waiting to sing and to dance and to talk and to be described. All quite vivid. I'm sure there's a lot I've forgotten. But what was there was there, very markedly, and it all had to be changed as I became a New Yorker. I didn't become an American, I became a New Yorker, in the sense of learning the city, and appreciating the city and exploring the city, and being amazed by the city. When you come from a neighborhood that's, at most, four streets square, or five. And the city as it then was, was enormously exciting. It was the time of the Depression, and there was no place to go but up, (she laughs) you couldn't go down very much. And I have no resentment, nor do any of my friends, who remember that time, of the fact that you ran from job, to job, to job, for 25 cents an hour, for 30 cents an hour, everybody did it, everybody was poor, nobody felt poor. There were no contrasts in our particular society. So that, and you also had a sense of being in a stage, a state of political foment. You didn't always know what you were talking about, nor what the other guy was talking about, but things were going to be better, they were going to be up, up, up, up, through Socialism, through Anarchism, through Communism, through rent strikes, through throwing out the President of City College or whatever was going on. But it was going on. There wasn't the kind of lassitude that kids live through now. We were involved in everything, whether actively or in the sense of being emotionally tied to some idea or ideas. Then of course there was the great trouble one had with sex, which doesn't exist now. The troubles are different, and they're greater maybe. But we couldn't find out anything, our mothers wouldn't tell us. And what we told each other as kids, I'm not talking now of high school and college, were weird, weird, weird stories. But there was no place to go for advice, no place to get birth control information, so there was an awful lot of fumbling. Very often fumbling with patient affection but fumbling. And there were a fair number of illegal abortions, which were much too expensive for girls who had nothing. You ran around borrowing five bucks here, three bucks there, and two bucks from another friend, and they were dreadful things because they were uncontrolled and performed by people who were uncontrolled and uncontrollable. But it was, in spite of that, it was a very fervid time. There was the WPA Theater. There was music to be had. There was so much to learn., there were teachers who would teach you actually, who were very passionate about teaching, to the point of working extra hours, giving you extra time. So that was my time of almost self-discovery, being a New Yorker, and getting into everything that was New York, or everything that I could touch that was New York, including prohibition. And I even had a speakeasy I had right near Hunter College, into which I'd go with my pile of books, and the men were so amused. They'd let us sit there for one small drink until the real customers came in at 5:30, and then we had to leave. But it was a very complete time. and I was very greedy so I took as much of it as I could. Got into trouble a lot, but never terribly seriously, going to the edge but never quite jumping in. And I think most of us live that way. We had sense that there was an awful lot to experience and we weren't afraid to experience it. It probably was our duty to experience it, as well as our need. I mentioned before, very lightly, that the Ellis Island experience and everything that went before it and came after it was the beginnings of making a travel writer. The watching, the listening, the learning phrases, the tremendous awareness at all times, and a certain kind of responsiveness to all sorts of people. Curiosity rather than xenophobia. And then I think having learned New York, and it actually worked out that way, my first book was about New York. Then, "What's the rest of the world like? I conquered that one." And it turned out that the New York book was very successful, and I was offered contracts, "Where would you like to go next? Here's some money." And that's how it happened. And I lived in Mexico and in Europe for about 12 years, and it's the only way to travel, if you can afford it. A year in Rome, a year and a half in Rome. A year in Paris. Endless time in London. A year and a half in Mexico. It was absolutely wonderful. I was unattached and responsible to nobody except me, and it was a great way to live. The only thing that, and people questioned me about this and ask, "Weren't you lonely?", and I don't think that you can be lonely in a place where your absorption is so great that every minute gives you something. I made friends in Paris, made friends in London, ultimately, you meet people ultimately, ties, certain ties develop, but for long periods I was alone. It didn't bother me. There was something else to see, something else to hear, something else to observe, something else to sketch, and so I didn't have that sense of being alone. Maybe I'm a loner, maybe that's what makes a travel writer, I don't know. I don't think I'm a loner. I think that a good travel writer though, or a devoted travel writer, has to be at least a little bit in love with the subject, not to have that sense of loneliness. That you have to be quite, quite, quite total in your devotion to what you're seeing, what you're thinking, what you're writing and how you're writing. So it was a very good period. Now whether it has to do with being singular as a write which is being a singular person in the choice of profession in a recognition or non- recognition, maybe that's part of it. Or maybe it is my very strong, or an occasional difficulty I will have with a sentence, with a simple English sentence. Which comes out, somebody said I write in Polish phrases, I don't know enough Polish to judge. I think he was being a wiseguy. But that's part of the immigrant thing, also a sense of mingling with Americans as I do, and thinking, "Where in the hell did he get that thought?" which is not my thought, which would never be my thought. And I think that these are little shreds, which are not troublesome. They're colorful actually, of that feeling that somewhere there is a, I am a "them," no great distinction, but fun. DALLETT: (Due to lack of time the interview stops here) This is the end od side two of Interview Number 180 with Kate Simon.