APPEL: This is Willa Appel. I'm speaking with Harry Slochower on June 6th, Friday, and we're beginning the interview at two o'clock and we're going to talk with Harry about his immigration experience from Austria in 1913. This is interview number 192. Harry, just to begin this, do you remember much about where you grew up in Austria? SLOCHOWER: Some. I was born in Sulitza-Moldawa, a little village, I don't know how many souls, there weren't any bodies there, but there were souls, they were counted as souls, and the only souls that was counted was Jews. There was--they didn't exist, you see. And, I soon remember that every Sunday, the policemen were out with their sabers. Every Sunday, these poor people out there, they had no life, except to drink. So on Sunday they got drunk. Everybody got drunk, I mean, all the gentiles, the goyim, got drunk, because Jews don't get drunk. And then they got into fights, you know, and I still remember the sabers, you know, the glistening, the atmosphere in the afternoon on Sunday. That I remember. Of course, I vividly remember the house I lived in. And, but there wasn't anything special. APPEL: What was it like? SLOCHOWER: Well, it was a country house with a stoop, and you had to go down the stairs in order to get out of the house, and of course, I remember my parents. APPEL: What was the economy of the town? What did people do? SLOCHOWER: We had a grocery store. That was the alpha and omega of our existence. Our existence was a grocery store. And we sold, you know, groceries to people in the villages. You came around and paid for these things, and that's how we made a living. That's how we made a living. Now, who else did anything, I don't remember. I don't recall anybody doing anything else, except what we did. You know, it's Old World, there was a sense of my world, you see. And, I'm trying to give you a picture of what the life out there was like, you know, and it's difficult to put it into words. See, Jews didn't count. They were outside the [majority] altogether. They were there, but they didn't--they weren't real to us, see. So it was only the Jews. And, the Jews were pious, were religious. My parents were. Went to synagogue on Saturdays and so on and so forth, [. . .] and Yom Kippur and other days and things like that. Half-believing it. It wasn't altogether disbelief, it wasn't complete belief. But it was not without belief. And, my father was a very strong--he had a very strong character. He was a very strong person. My mother was good, kind, generous, but she was not a personality, not a personality at all. I can just think of her sitting in a chair, and giving--she gave and gave and gave and gave and gave and gave, to anybody and everybody. And silently, unostentatiously, and so on. My father, whatever he did, you knew he did it. Kind of a--and--the place he had in the village, I'm trying to figure out, what his place was, maybe it will come as we talk. Maybe if you ask some more questions, something will come up. APPEL: Well, you came over in 1913. What prompted your family to decide to come? SLOCHOWER: Well now, I remember one phrase which my father kept on saying: "Europe is finished. Europe is finished." My father, he was educated in the Hebraic tradition but not otherwise; he was not specially educated. But he had a keen sense of intuition. And he knew that 1914 was coming. He knew the World War was coming. He knew there was going to be an upheaval and so on and so forth. And his phrase was, and I remember it, "Europe is finished." This was in 1910, 1911, 1912, I don't know. And, so he decided that we go to the land of good--the "golden land of opportunity." Golden Medina, golden land, golden country. And, so, he sold everything, and I don't recall now, but it came to me as though, as I was thinking about it, there was a little pull on his heartstrings here, about having left, through the troubled era. I mean, seeing Fiddler on the Roof reminded me about it a little bit, you know, because near the end of what we--but we had a long life after that. But, that we left through this troubled era. Because, there must have been, I mean, I just had a feeling, I don't recall any specific incident. It must have torn something within me. While life wasn't easy, it was my life. APPEL: And you were--had grown up there, and had friends there, I would think. SLOCHOWER: What's that? APPEL: You had friends there, you were thirteen when you left. So-- SLOCHOWER: Yeah. I don't recall any friends, but I mean, I was in high school, gymnasium, I think, by that time I had two years of gymnasium, maybe more, and gymnasium is high school, and I must have had some friends. I vaguely remember some boys I knew. I knew no girls until much, much later. I was very, very, very backwards that way. And, so it was my father who decided that Europe was finished. And it was an intuitive insight on his part. APPEL: Did you have relatives in America? SLOCHOWER: Yes-- APPEL: Or contacts with people who-- SLOCHOWER: Very little. We had an uncle and an aunt who lived here. Uncle Rolf, was his name. And him, I remember. He was very bright, and fresh and brilliant personality. He was the only one I recall. Otherwise, we just came, we came here, you might say penniless, but I don't suppose that's possible, but we came here without much money anyway. And relying--having no one to rely on. I was the ballot against this thing, because America to me was death. America to me was the, the complete negation of culture. APPEL: This is at age thirteen. SLOCHOWER: Age thirteen. Yeah, I was [. . .] the arts [. . .] a student of gymnasium. And, so I fought against going as hard as I could. Now, not much I could do, it was my parents' decision. My mother was very unhappy about it because of me being unhappy. I had--oh yes, two of my brothers had preceded me. It was three of my brothers--I had three brothers. Older brothers. They preceded me, and they came to America first, see. And it was my two sisters and I who came in 1913. APPEL: With your parents? SLOCHOWER: With my parents, yeah. And I--and that I remember--I don't think it was wholehearted, somehow. Maybe I felt my father was right, I don't know. I think I put on a little bit of a show, but outwardly I felt very strong against going to a land of people didn't know anything, ignorance, uncultured, uncivilized, and so on and so forth. I had studied--I had begun to study Latin and Greek, in gymnasium, you start that in gymnasium, Latin and Greek. Just the beginnings of it, see. In America, we would never learn Latin and Greek; the two, they just don't go together. APPEL: Do you remember what arrangements were made to come to America. You said the family--your father sold the store. SLOCHOWER: Yeah, we had the grocery store, he sold that. Just very, very general. Let's see. I wasn't taken in confidence, of course. I was a little boy of thirteen. But, whether arrangements were made with people here, in this country, I don't recall. I had an uncle or two. APPEL: But you must--how did you go from your small town to, I think it was Rotterdam? SLOCHOWER: That was a [journey]. I remember we stopped at--well, [Kimpalovia] was the capital of Bukovina, and that was the biggest town I knew, was [Kimpalovia]. Then, we stopped over the capital of [Ilicia] because Cracow or--no, no--Limburg], Limburg, see. I remember all those things. We stopped there, the train stopped there. It was a great event for me; these names meant a lot to me. They represented milestones of something or other. And then, of course, we went by way of Bremen--I think it was Bremen, yeah--and then, let me see, it was really amazing, because my father was not a man who knew how to go about things. And he was able to take the whole family, which consisted of my mother, and my two sisters and me, himself, that means four or five people, and arrange to take a [. . .] to Bremen and get a boat and come to America. He must have been quite [. . .] I give him credit for in my memory. APPEL: Do you remember what the ship was like? SLOCHOWER: I remember we were second class, see it has various classes. And second class, you could get kosher food, and this, of course, is why we chose the second class thing. And it was the thing called the Frankfurt, I'm not sure about this, but this may have been the name of the boat. It took thirteen days, thirteen days. It was a leisurely trip! Thirteen days to go from--to New York. And, did I get seasick? I don't think I got seasick, no. I think my mother did, anyway. But it was very slow, but nothing especially--I mean, I knew we had to prepare yourself for this new world in some meaningful way, you know, gargantuan way. And the trip was the rite of passage for me, to go to--from Europe to-- APPEL: Do you remember what you did on board ship? Would you describe-- SLOCHOWER: This just brings up a memory, which I tend to forget, and which in my analysis, even my analysis, I forgot to mention. There was a person on that boat. And he was--he molested young boys. And he did it with me. And this, I guess, has to do more, a lot, with my view of my father, I guess it must be ultimately, of being unable to say no to anybody who was an authority; my father was a very strong man, and this guy, he was a gentile, person, and he would abuse me--evidently, I didn't feel as though I was abused--sexually. He would touch me and so on. And things like that. Now, I didn't enjoy it, I didn't like it, but I didn't have enough in me to say no. But, somehow or other, my family got wind of it, I mean, they felt something was wrong there. Because he kept on visiting, and overdoing it, see. "This guy must be on to something." So, I remember one of my uncles, Uncle Jack, once followed him. Went up on the roof and cornered him on the roof, and see, and anyway, they cornered him. And, then, of course, what they made him do is give them money. So, I was ransomed from this purser, by my family. APPEL: Uncle Jack was also with you on the voyage? SLOCHOWER: Yeah. APPEL: This was your father's brother? SLOCHOWER: Yeah. Yeah. But this bursar business, for some reason, nothing, it was not really terrible, it was--I didn't like it, but, I guess what was terrible about it is that I did not have enough gumption to say no. I hadn't--in my analyses, I never mentioned it. The first time I mentioned it. APPEL: I'll ask you some more questions about this ship. Who knows what we'll uncover! SLOCHOWER: Well, I mean, this, this I didn't like at all, but I did not know, I didn't have the courage to say no. But what he did wasn't that terrible, you know, he was sucking me and things like that. But I let him do it, I let him do it. APPEL: Do you remember anything else about the crossing? Do you remember eating in a dining room; was that different from what you were used to? SLOCHOWER: I remember my grandmother, one of my grandmothers was on the boat with us. I guess it was my father's mother. And she, you know, as the guy passed by with, oh, whatever it was, she touched it and then put it back, you know, just touched it and didn't eat it, and the person or whoever it was who was carrying it just immediately took it and threw it out, and it was terrible to waste food; food was--you don't waste food. To this day, with my family, I get charged when food is wasted. Maybe it might be ten cents wasted. APPEL: Harry, it sounds like this was a larger expedition than just your parents, your two sisters, and yourself. If your grandmother also was coming to America-- SLOCHOWER: Yes, she came too. APPEL: And your father's brother-- SLOCHOWER: Yeah, and another one, [Hana] come here. APPEL: So it was a family exodus. SLOCHOWER: It was more of a family exodus, yeah. And, as I said, the reason for it was my father's decision that America--that Europe was finished. Europe is finished! APPEL: Did you have a--you said that you thought that America was an uncivilized, uncultured place. Did you have any expectations beyond that of what you were going to find? SLOCHOWER: No, I didn't think I would be able to revolutionize it. I was a revolutionary by nature, but I don't think I could do anything with a [. . .] country, like [. . .] I picked up phrases, like Santayana, I remember I wrote to him once, you know who George Santayana--I wrote to him once about writing an essay on Puritan and America. And his answer is in this context, he says, "What can be the context? Europe is so cultured; America is so raw." That was my feeling about America. It still is. To a large extent, I still think of America as being--in other words, when I make a joke and say "I haven't left Europe yet," it's not a complete joke. I'm still there. APPEL: What about your arrival in New York Harbor and going through Ellis Island? SLOCHOWER: As far as I recall, well, I don't, I don't think there was any special problem. Maybe we were prepared for whatever problems there were, but I don't recall that anybody made it especially difficult for us. APPEL: Do you remember actually being on Ellis Island? SLOCHOWER: Yeah. Yeah. I remember, as I said, it was called [Castle Garden], which to me, "Kessel," you know, literally means --you said "Castle"--I guess that's one meaning of it. But to me, what the image it brings up, is a turmoil--that's--that's not the name, that's not what it means, but that's what-- APPEL: --it means to you. SLOCHOWER: An image, yeah. You're awfully good to talk to. So, [Castle] Garden was a fit name, to me, for the country I was coming to, where everything was all mixed up. APPEL: And, it sounds like that was your actual experience at Ellis Island. Do you remember lots of people and chaos? SLOCHOWER: Not especially. I know I looked, I looked forward with the greatest negativity. Because I knew this was it, see, once I land on Ellis Island, we couldn't go back, see. And I did not want to go to America. Did not want to come to America. And I joke about it to this day, see, "I haven't arrived yet." Which is not altogether not so, it's almost not so, but not altogether, in the sense that my roots, I feel, are still European, in terms of culture, affiliation, and cultural outlook, expectancy, appreciation of culture. It's for me the European, for an American who has been contacted, in contact with Europe. APPEL: What about your family? Do you have any memories of how they were reacting to arriving in America, or what their feelings were like? Were you aware of how they felt? SLOCHOWER: Well, I have to speculate. My father, of course, he had made his decision that Europe was finished. So, I don't know whether he looked forward to coming to America, but I imagine to some extent he may have, because he was in a new country and so on. My mother just never expressed any feelings, as though she had no right to express feelings. She was a beautiful human being. Beautiful human being. And was not appreciated by her husband. I loved her very, very much, very deeply. And I think I may have been unhappy in part because she was coming to America too, as though she deserved a better fate than that. APPEL: Do you have any recollection of the inspections that people went through at Ellis Island when you were physically examined and asked questions. SLOCHOWER: Nothing besides vague, vague vision of people going into certain places and presenting documents, being looked at, and so on. But there was--I don't recall any special problems. APPEL: Did you have to sleep over? At Ellis Island? SLOCHOWER: Offhand, I would say no, but I'm not sure. APPEL: Did your older brothers meet you? Did they come to meet you? SLOCHOWER: See now--were we met by somebody--I don't recall that. I don't know if they were all there. I had three brothers, older brothers. And, I don't recall that they met us. It's as though I--it was my fate or fortune, or whatever you want to call it, to make my own life. I had no one to depend on. Not that they were untrustworthy or faithless. They just couldn't. They were not in the--they were greenhorns. That was the name. They were called greenhorns. Do you know that phrase? They were greenhorns, see. And I--my feeling was, I gotta make my own place, there's nobody to help. I didn't feel sorry for myself, it just is a fact. APPEL: Do you--once you got to New York, did you go to one of the houses of your brothers? I'm just trying to stick to the historical. SLOCHOWER: I think--one of my brothers had an apartment on the Lower East Side. I think it was the fifth floor, a walk-up, and that's, I remember, going to. How long we stayed there, I don't know. But, it was some time. APPEL: We're going to cut for the tape to turn over. SLOCHOWER: Why, is she getting tired? APPEL: The tape is running out. END OF SIDE ONE, TAPE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE APPEL: This is the beginning of side two of the interview with Harry Slochower. Harry, going back to your arrival, and going to one of your brother's houses on the Lower East Side, did--looking at New York or just the city of New York, did that make any impression on you? SLOCHOWER: Multiplicity and chaos. And without--and the absence of culture. I guess I was prepared--this is the, I suppose, something I expected to be--the negation of culture. America, that's what America meant to me. APPEL: But, that feeling sounds like it was so strong that you, perhaps you weren't opened to what America also was? SLOCHOWER: Well, I wasn't open to--to this day, I don't know--I don't know what America can offer, aside from practical things, you know. I still don't know what America can offer. I guess I am an inveterate European. APPEL: You're an inveterate European. What about school? Did you speak English at the time? SLOCHOWER: This is going to sound funny--I learned to speak English in two weeks. Nobody understood me. See, I learned it from the book, you know. See, I was bright, and so on and so forth. But, pronunciation and enunciation was such that nobody understood what I was saying. But I was able to speak in two weeks. It took a little while before things got straightened out so people could know what I was talking about. But, I didn't learn it--I learned it after I got here. But, in two weeks, I was able to master the grammar and all that sort of thing. See, English, to me, again, is America--why bother--how much time do you have to devote to learn the-- APPEL: Did you go to school? Were you enrolled in school? SLOCHOWER: Yes, I was. This is what happened. My parents knew nothing about school and this and that. In school--I had more than two years of gymnasium, and my mother, not knowing, you see, put me in 5A, fifth grade, 5A. And one day, the teacher, you know, happened to come along, and got talking to me about--this was after a week or two, or a month, I don't know. And I--so she learned--my very, very--you know, sort of all the secrets of language, that I had been to high school, gymnasium. And, she [. . .] And so, so they skipped me to 8A. From 5A to 8A, being skipped! I was not in the grade that I belonged. But that's what happened. And I didn't object. My parents knew nothing about things like that. Didn't try or, I don't think it mattered in the long run. But, to give you--it does illustrate how somebody who has been to high school and so on can be put in an elementary fifth grade. To me, it's a miracle that it happened. I was the recipient of that miracle. APPEL: Did you make friends with students once you were in the eighth grade? SLOCHOWER: I had no especial difficulty, but I--my guess would be, not with many, and only with those who had something of a European flavor about them. I mean, just friends like, no, I don't think so. I was thirteen then, difficult years for me, I imagine. And I learned nothing, I got nothing from my parents, I mean, about adolescence and sex and girls and things like that. They never, you know, children and parents don't talk about these things. So, I didn't get anything from them, and I didn't learn very much from the streets, because I was not out much in the street. I was a good student. APPEL: And, did you feel comfortable? SLOCHOWER: Did I feel what? APPEL: Were you living in the Lower East Side? SLOCHOWER: Oh yeah, we lived there for a number of years. And then later on, I don't know exactly how many, maybe two, three, or four years, and then we moved, as so many Jewish families did, to the Bronx. What is the name of that famous street--I'll think of it in a moment. When I try not to think of it-- APPEL: Grand Concourse? SLOCHOWER: That's exactly it, yeah. We moved to the Grand Concourse. And lived there for quite a while. APPEL: Well, when you were on the Lower East Side, which was a community of immigrants, did you feel comfortable there? Did you feel alien still, that you were European and you didn't belong? How did you feel? SLOCHOWER: I don't recall any marked alienation. America, of course, was alienation to me at large, that was it. After that, not anything much. America was not even barbarism. Barbarism had a certain quality to it, you know. You know, something you respect. But America, American culture, it wasn't even barbarism. I'm saying that now; I didn't think so then; I mean, nothing [was strange], but I never felt at home in this country, I never did. APPEL: But you did become a citizen. SLOCHOWER: Well, my father became a citizen, and I couldn't help it. I mean, I didn't--I didn't not want to, see, and care one way or another. My father became a citizen, and so I became because I was underage or something like that. APPEL: And how did your family, the other members of the family, feel about having come here and left Europe? SLOCHOWER: My brothers and sisters and I--we never talked, you know, really, how we felt about important, about personal things. And, they just took it--it came, without any response as I can tell, without any marked reaction one way or another. APPEL: If you had to do it over again, would you have stayed? SLOCHOWER: Well, you know, darling--you don't have to take down the darling part--if you have it, leave it there, it fits, but I just want you to know--I've known her for a long time--beautiful human being--anyway, what did you ask me? APPEL: I said, if you had to do it over again-- SLOCHOWER: Yeah, well, that question, the reason I passed over it is because I'm gonna make a negative comment, and that is, that question is meaningless to me. Now, you never confront doing the same thing over again. So the question has never meant anything to me. Now, the thing is I did, and I went through that experience, so if I'm the same person, I suppose I would do it over again the same way. But it doesn't seem to--the answer doesn't really get to the heart. APPEL: Well, maybe let me put it this way. You, in the course of your lifetime, you had chances to go back to Europe and to settle. SLOCHOWER: Not really, not really, not to settle. I've been back to Europe. I got a Guggenheim Fellowship and I got another fellowship, I got two fellowships, and with that I could do whatever I wanted to. And I did go back to Europe with the Guggenheim. But, not to settle. In other words, my productivity depended on my being uprooted forever. This business of finding [. . .] Human beings need alienation in order to live like human beings. APPEL: Well, I think that's all the questions I have. Do you have any questions? SLOCHOWER: Now it's your turn. Now I'm going to start asking you questions. APPEL: Well, thank you very much. SLOCHOWER: It was really a pleasure to see you, be with you, talk to you, and the visit was beautiful. APPEL: This is the end of the interview with Harry Slochower.