DANE: This is Debby Dane and I'm speaking with Gertrude Schneider Smith on Wednesday, February 5, 1986. We're beginning this interview at 3:25. We're about to interview Mrs. Smith about her immigration experience from Switzerland in 1921. She was eleven years old and this is Interview Number 171. Mrs. Smith, we'll start at the beginning. If you would tell us what date you were born and where. SMITH: Okay, I was born in, a small town by the name of Frutigen. F-R-U-T-I-G-E-N. Now this small town is in the Bernise Alps and, uh, it's, well it's, uh, town where it's mostly, there are no factories, it's, uh, it's mostly grazing. There are cows, most of the farmers had cows. And it's one of these fairy tale things like Heidi where the cows went up to the mountains in the fall and came back in the spring, rather and came back down in the fall, and while they were up in the mountains the, uh, herdsman who went up with them lived in these small chalets and they made cheese and butter and then brought it back down with them. The cows had beautiful big bells depending on how much cream they had in their milk. And they made, uh, they didn't make chocolate there, they only made the cheese. And they'd bring the cheese back down with them in these great big, uh, wooden sort of trays they had on their shoulders. And-- DANE: What do you mean, the bells would, on the cows would depend on what kind of-- SMITH: If the, uh, if the cows gave a lot of cream and much milk or there was a lot of cream in her milk, she was the best cow, she got the biggest bell and they wore them around their neck. Now, the people who were up there on the mountains made these, uh, you must have seen them, they made the, uh, collars or whatever the bells were hung on. They were made out of leather and they were beautifully decorated. And the bells would go clank, clank, clank, and make all different sounds because the bells were all different sizes. So it was beautiful, it was beautiful to see them coming back down the mountain in the, uh, fall. DANE: How many different kinds of cheese would they be able to make? One or two-- SMITH: Well, there's a soft cheese that I can't remember the name of it, but, uh, then there was the harder cheese and de[ending on when they went up there and how long it took because the cheese kept getting pressed and pressed and pressed. Most of the time it was the soft sort of cheese. Not the hard swiss cheese with the holes in it. Because that takes much longer. DANE: Would you go up with, was it just the men that took the cows up for the summer? SMITH: Mostly it's the men and the boys would, uh, take the cows up there. And they would stay there all summer. DANE: All summer? Whoa, sounds like so much-- SMITH: And as soon as the snow started, as the snow started the cows kept coming down farther and farther and farther. Because there isn't that much land in Switzerland so they had to graze someplace and most of the land that's down near the houses or near the barns was used to, uh, for hay so they had to cut it. Two cuttings most of the time. DANE: In your family, did your father, was he the farmer? What did he do? SMITH: My father's, uh, father had a farm. And usually in Switzerland if one person, one family has a farm, it's passed down, because land is very scarce in Switzerland, and it isn't very likely that your going to be able to buy more land. You can usually lease it. You can own your own house but you lease the land, you never own it. But in those days, they did own that piece of land, and it was, uh, usually it was passed down to the youngest son, because they figured that that way the, the boy would last longer, the younger son would last longer than the older son. Though my father didn't want any part of the farming business. DANE: Why is that? He just didn't like it. SMITH: He was more mechanically inclined. He was very, he was an inventive sort of person. And he liked to work with machinery and, uh, he liked to tinker, really. He didn't like farming a bit. So it went to his next oldest brother. Next youngest brother. DANE: And your mother, would she work in a store, a shop, or something? SMITH: No, my mother was working in a hotel. There was a lot of these hotels where people came from the cities to go to in the summer time. And this is where she worked. Uh, as a chambermaid, more or less. DANE: What language did you speak in this part of Switzerland? SMITH: Uh, we spoke a Bernise dialect. It's, uh, more German than uh, anything else. Instead of being like the French, they would, if your, uh, near the French border you spoke more French. And if you live near the Italian border you spoke a dialect of Italian. DANE: Would you go to school or were you required to work outside the home, as little girl? SMITH: Oh no, your, uh, you go to school. We started at, uh, five year old or six years old, now I've forgotten. But we went to school and, uh, we learned much more in the first grade, oh well, maybe they did here to at that time, because that was quite a while ago. And we learned how to embroider, I have some embroidery, already, today. (She laughs.) Kept all these years. And, uh, you learned reading and you learned writing. If you stayed in school long enough, besides your language, like, it would be the German language that we learned. Uh, you would also learn Italian, and you would also learn French and then you would also learn, uh, languages dead now, it's Romanish. It's something like Latin. But they don't do that anymore. DANE: It sounds like an awful lot. SMITH: Yeah, but when your smaller you're still, you're much more, uh, much easier to learn in different languages than it is when after you're older. You get used to one. DANE: In the embroidery, were there particular patterns that you would use and-- SMITH: No, most of it was uh, to my age anyway, my grade. You learned the stitches. Just the plain in and out stitch, then, uh, a stitch where you would go. (She laughs.) I still remember in and out and then backwards and around and different stitches that would help you with the embroidery part later. That came later when you really got into it. DANE: And what kind of artifacts and clothing would you embroider? Was this a skill that was used for linens or clothing or-- SMITH: For linens, yes, and, uh, there's a lot of embroidery, even when you go to Switzerland now. There's handkerchiefs that are beautifully embroidered with lace and it's things like that. And the costumes, part of your costume and your blouses and dresses were all embroidered, and this is what you learned then. DANE: Were they, would you do them in the winter time and was summer time sort of active outdoor activity-- SMITH: Well, uh, the school's there, you were in school when there was nothing else to do outside. If there was haying to do then at that haying season you didn't go to school. Now this isn't true in the cities, but it was in the countryside. And, uh, each community had a different vacation time for kids because vacation time is usually work time. DANE: Huh. And tell me a little about the customs. Did you, when you were a little girl have a dirndl, what I call a dirndl, you'd call them something else, I think. SMITH: Well, uh, we had, yeah, it was like play clothes or work clothes though. But it was the same idea. It would be a gathered skirt. And it was usually a, uh, uh, an old pinafore over the top or it was like an apron over the top, And in the winter time we had very heavy woolen socks. Usually they were knitted. Oh yeah, we also learned how to knit in school. And usually the socks or stockings were knitted. The other thing we didn't make were shoes, I guess. DANE: Did you have leather shoes? SMITH: We had leather shoes, but you had to but those. DANE: Uh-huh. And were they a particular color for your region? SMITH: No, uh, I don't think so. They were lot of edelweiss patterns, of course, and the, there was a blue flower, to and that was used a lot in the embroidery. Uh, mostly the wild flowers. They embroidered, uh, patterns of the wild flowers. DANE: In school would you at all study about America and learn about what the United states was? SMITH: Well I was only in the third grade when we left. And, oh we didn't hear too much about the United States. We learned mostly about Switzerland. Now you can take any child in Switzerland and they know more about their own country first of all, then learn about other countries. But they could tell you by just looking at a mountain, no matter where they are or what part of Switzerland they are. They cane tell you that's Mount so and so. And they seem to know and they read maps like it's. like you read a menu. They have no problems at all reading maps and they can tell you oh, that's so far from here and so far from, it's very interesting and they are very, very thorough. And later on when you do go to (German name) they call it, it's like high school. And, uh, they then, uh, learn all about, like the countries that border them for one thing. And they're very intelligent on their own, uh, what goes on in their own country and what goes on in the world. Far more so than we are here. DANE: Uh-huh. So tell me the story, how you, your father ended coming to America. Starting at the beginning-- SMITH: Well, like I told you, he didn't want to be a farmer. So, uh, he, uh, he married my mother though, while he was still at home and, because I can remember. He used to go see her, I don't remember but I remember him telling it, that he used to go, he used to see my mother. Now I went to this place, where my mother worked in Ashe. It's a hotel, and I don't understand how he could make the trip to, on skis, because it's really uphill. So, but anyway, he did. And when they got married, of course, his father didn't like the idea because he wanted, he thought he was marrying under his, you know, what do you call it? He should, he should have married somebody better, than my mother. And-- DANE: Because she worked in a hotel? SMITH: Because she worked in a hotel. So, uh, they were never very friendly and my mother, uh, we very, very seldom went to see his father with my mother there. It's either one of us went with my father and that's about it. But as far as all the whole family going there, we very seldom went there, they didn't get along. And my mother never forgave him because he didn't. he felt that way toward her. So anyway, they were married, and they lived in this Frutigen, in this small town for quite some time. Uh, because I was born there. And then after h moved away from there, went to another town, by the name of Thun. T-H-U-N. Bow this town had factories and that is where he got work. In the factory. And he, that didn't last too long because, then the war came. And he had to go to war. So when the war came, he, this was the first World War. We moved back to Frutigen. And, uh, he came back in the meantime, uh, we must have cone back before the war started because he had started a business there. An upholstery business. And, uh, when he went off to war, he left the business to my mother. My mother had never done anything like that before. She had always depended on him for everything. So she let the business go, and she wasn't a business-minded person I guess. But, uh, when he came home, the business went bankrupt because he couldn't, well, he couldn't collect from anybody, the bills that were owing. He still owed people for the materials he used to make, he made mattresses, over his, uh, what do you call it? Upholstered chairs and he made things out of leather. And when he couldn't collect, of course, he went bankrupt. Then he tried again to find a job in a factory so he couldn't find anything. Because by this time he decided, well, he was of the mind that the, uh, working people should have a little more money and not have the manufacturers have it all. So they called him a Bolshevik and a Red and he was far beyond his time because what he was trying to do was form like a union. So he couldn't get jobs in factories. Well, then finally somebody told him, "Why don't you go to America? America's the land of opportunity. The streets are lined with gold, there's plenty there, you can get wealthy over there." So he finally decided he would try it. And he got a loan from a Mr. Granelli that lived in Frutigen. And we went to live with my mother. My mother's mother. So we stayed there a whole year. While we were there we, what did we do? Oh we had fun, that was a fun year though. And I remember it. DANE: You went to school? SMITH: Went to school there and we had to herd sheep and goats and we had rabbits and we had guinea pigs and, uh, of course we lived off the rabbits because there was no meat. It was very hard during that time, right after the War. So my mother got sick and she was worried mostly and I think that's what did it. She was really worried. DANE: Would you hear from your father? SMITH: Yes we got letters and he told us about the trip over there. DANE: What did he say? SMITH: And, how it took two weeks over on the boat, with the boat. And he was in steerage class. There was like steerage class, first class, second class, third class, on the boat. Depending on what you could afford. Steerage class was where all the freight and stuff was. So there weren't any facilities as far as sanitary facilities were bad. And because the waves were so huge and the ship took so long the people that were in steerage got very sick. A lot of them got sick. They had, oh, anyway. (They laugh.) But anyway, uh, there was a lot of dysentery and they couldn't, they couldn't control it, really. Because it spread. So he got sick too. But he tried not to, uh, let it get him down. He went up on deck whenever he could. Then he told it. But, uh, the stench and everything, down in that steerage was terrible. So they finally landed in New York, anyway, and he had to have somebody there that would meet him and assure him, the government or, whatever, that he would have a job and a place to live before they would let him off Ellis Island. So they, there was a man there who was an importer of cheeses and chocolates and stuff, by the name of Mr. Donner. And he took my father under his wing. They got him a job at this dairy farm. And then, uh-- DANE: In New Jersey, or-- SMITH: In New York. It's a very small town by the name of Cotterkill. I don't even find it on the map anymore. Maybe it's not there or it has been incorporated into some big town. So, uh, he got a job there as a herdsman because everybody thought oh, if he's Swiss, he came from Switzerland, uh, just cows, and that's all he knows. So he worked there until he got enough money to send for us. And, uh, that was, oh maybe a little over a year. DANE: When he left, did you, were you aware that he was going far away and you wouldn't see him for a long time? SMITH: Oh yes, we knew that. I can still see me, uh, my two, my brother, and sister, my mother, we were waving to him because we lived where my mother's mother house was. It was on a sort of on a grade. I thought it was a steep hill until I went back there. But it was a grade and down below was the railroad station. And I can still see me, uh, on my brother's, uh, my brother and sister were standing there waving. My mother is crying and it's one of these things and it's like photogenic thing that stays with you. It's almost like a photograph. DANE: Were you crying? SMITH: We were crying too, yes. DANE: And did you say, "We'll see you soon." Or did you think you would see him soon? Or-- SMITH: no, because by the way mother talked. She was so afraid that he would never come back. That he would be swallowed up in this ocean. Because it was so far away. And this is what her feeling was. That she would never see him again. So she transmitted that feeling to us more or less. But. like kids, we bounced back. It was no time at all before, that we got letters. Then, of course, for a long time we didn't get a letter. It took, it takes over a week. It takes almost two weeks for a letter to go by boat. Even now. DANE: Did you imagine what America must be like? Would you ever-- SMITH: All I could think of was this is the most beautiful place, it must be like heaven. That's the way we pictured it. It was all, uh, just gold and silver and jewels and, because that's the way they talked. And for us that's the way it sounded. Like it was like Christmas. That's the way it sounded. Like everyday would be Christmas there. DANE: Even though you came, you were living in this beautiful surrounding and where it was sort of, sounds picturesque to me. SMITH: It was I'll show you a postcard after it's, well I got them in there on the wall. I'm always getting postcards. It's a very pretty place. It's just that, uh, I don't know. It's just the way my parents talked. Because they couldn't, because my father couldn't get a job so he was bitter and my mother was always worried about him, and because she was sick and we thought everything would be fine once we got there. Everything would be, there would be nothing to worry about. DANE: Tell me a little bit more about your father's idea about organ, did he actually try to organize the workers? SMITH: He tried, yes he did, and that is why, uh, each manufacturer finally, he was on like a sort of, uh, I don't know. Like a little, what would you call it? DANE: Like a black list? SMITH: Like a black list. And none of the manufacturers would give him a job anymore. Because he was nothing but trouble. DANE: Because he thought workers should get more-- SMITH: Yeah, for what they did and manufacturers should, some of the money should be more even;y distributed. That's what he thought. And that they should get, uh, a few benefits. But, see that all came later. It's there now, but he was way before his time, you see? DANE: What year was, that was around 1919? SMITH: That would be 1920, yeah, 1919 right after the War. DANE: Do you suppose that he knew and was aware the Communists in Russia and the Revolution of 1917? SMITH: Oh I imagine they were, although for us as children we never, that never bothered us, we didn't pay that much attention to it. But I'm sure that they were aware of it. Because that was quite close. And even though Switzerland is an isolated little community almost, you could say. They still have to go and defend their borders. In those days like now with the airplanes and everything it would be easy to bomb Switzerland. But previous to that, when they had to figure out how they were going to get, uh, the tanks and everything over the roads that they had there. It was almost impossible. But they still had to guard them, guard the borders. And what made it worse then, to, is that by guarding the borders, and war all around them, they couldn't import coffee, they couldn't, because they didn't grow anything there. Switzerland is so small that, uh, it's very hard to grow enough food for the population that's there. They had to do a lot of importing. And by doing, by the borders being closed, nothing was coming in. DANE: Wow. So then your father had been gone a year and was able to send passage to you and your mother and brothers and sisters. Do you remember the preparations you went through to get ready to come? SMITH: Yes. I remember we, uh, had to get vaccinated and they took a little knife and they cut one, two, three, I still have scars. One, two, three little cuts on each arm. And into these cuts they must have put whatever serum or whatever they used for vaccinating. But our arms puffed way up. We had, we were all sick. And my poor mother, she got it, my brother got it, my sister got it, we got it, and I got it. And in order to, uh, uh, for, we all had fevers. We were all sick from this. I don't know how many different diseases they vaccinated us for. But it was terrible. DANE: Was that before you left? SMITH: Oh, that was before we left, uh, when we applied for the passport. Then my mother had to, uh, apply for the passport. Of course, we had to have pictures taken. And all this stuff she had to do herself and this is what I can never understand. Because it was so much against what anything she ever did because my father took care of everything like that. But she managed, with the help of friends, to do all that. What did I have down here? Oh, yes, and we got a job,uh, when we got a letter from our father he told us of his work at that town farm and how hard he had to work and how many hours and, uh, the treatment that he got, because, you see, it was right after the, uh, war. and everybody, no one like Germans or Germany and, uh, anything that sounded anywhere near like German. Name, Schneider and then the language, so, he would, he said that he had a very hard time and many times he sent over the letter my mother cried. But anyway, that's all gone by. And then in the spring we had to have, we had to be vaccinated, it was packing to do, there was furniture to get rid of and she had to make decisions on what to bring with her. I still have a feather bed that she brought with her. DANE: Did she bring the feather bed? SMITH: Oh, yeah. She brought a feather bed. And, uh, then she had to get, find uh, enough money because my father didn't send quite enough. So, the same Mr. Granelli that helped my father get over here, he also, uh, lent her money. DANE: How do you spell his name? SMITH: G-R-A-N-E-L-L-I. His mother, the mother is still living. His wife, that would be. He died, but his wife is still living in Frutigen. DANE: No kidding. SMITH: She's 90 years old. DANE: What did decide to bring? Do you remember helping pack. SMITH: I still have, uh, suitcase that she had with her, it was like, uh, wasn't pressed wood, there was, uh, a suitcase that was made out of woven reeds like, for one thing, it's very light. And she had to pack enough for us, oh, that she carried with us in the suitcase. She had to carry enough for us three children for clothing and, uh, on the boat, well she didn't know. Is it gonna be cold, is it gonna be warm, what? Now this is May, so in Switzerland May is warm. But she didn't know what kind of country she was coming too, or what the weather would be like. Actually, the weather here is very much like it is over there. But, uh, she had a suitcase that was brown and had straps around it, I remember so clearly. Plus this, wicker sort of thing, suitcase that she had all our clothes in. Now what she brought over, there's so much she had to leave behind that she couldn't bring over. She put it in a huge. it was a crate, similar to this, my father made it. But it was bigger than this. And, uh, some of her pots and pans, oh God, she put in there and a lot of clothes for her, of course. Clothing she had saved for my father. Uh, I remember a pair of shoes that she put in there that were my father's army shoes. Uh, oh, I don't know what else she had in there. But I know the featherbed came over. That came over on the boat. DANE: Did that trunk come, or go, or stay? SMITH: That trunk came, had to go by rail. But, of course, we went by rail to Le Harve to board the boat there. And, uh, the trunk went on the train and then went on the boat-- DANE: Did she bring dishes? SMITH: She brought some dishes. Not too many because she was so afraid that they would all break anyway. So she, she was very good at that. She didn't bring the, uh, dishes. She brought several, uh, my father used to be a sharpshooter and they would take money and put it on, say a post, way over there. Every Sunday, they had a club like that, every Sunday they would go there and they'd use their guns. Well, this is also a practice to keep them, uh, keep them good at shooting because they had to do that for the, military. Even now they keep all their, their uniforms, their guns and whatever. They keep it at their house. Each man does this so that if anything happened the military could be called off just like that. They all had their own uniforms they had, their guns. Everything had to be ship shape. And so this is the way they practiced. DANE: And did your mother pack his guns? SMITH: That, no. That they had to leave there. But he had trophies so she brought his trophy's back with them too. That's how the gun, that's how I remember the gun part. DANE: Time to switch? Okay. Tell me when. This is the end of side one. Gertrude Schneider Smith, Interview Number 171. It is 4:40, 4:45. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO DANE: This is the beginning of side two, Gertrude Smith, Interview Number 171 and it's 4:55. You packed up, ready to go. Do you remember the day you left your village? SMITH: Uh, I remember, yes. I do. We walked down the hill of this, (She laughs.) this big hill it was a grade. We walked down and we boarded the train and. of course, there was some friends of ours, uh, my father's two brother's and some friends of my mother's. And, of course, it was a sad goodbyes and crying and please write and all that. And, uh, we took off. But, of course, for us children, the train ride was a ball. It was fun, it was a, it was a great experience. And as we travelled through the country-side we had to go from there we had to go all the way through Switzerland, awh, too bad I don't have a map I could show you. And then we entered France and we traveled all through France. It's the first time I ever saw a black and white cow was in France. And, uh, we thought, it was so funny, I can still remember that, too. And then we got to Le Harve and that was a big city. But from there, uh, I don't think we stayed over at a hotel at all, we went right on the boat. As far as I can remember. I don't remember staying at a hotel. And the boat was fun too. DANE: Had you ever seen anything as big as-- SMITH: As that> No, because, of course, Switzerland, we had boat's there, yes, but no ocean. So there's no ocean liner. And I tried and tried to remember what the name of the line was. It's still was in existence quite a few years ago. I know it was. Because every time I heard it, I would know it if I heard it but I don't remember it anymore. DANE: It wasn't one of the White Star lines or-- SMITH: No, it wasn't White Star. DANE: Or Red Star, or, uh. SMITH: No. And it wasn't the Queen Mary. (They laugh.) DANE: I can't remember what kind of boats. SMITH: I don't know, but anyway, it was a popular line. And, uh, we got on board, uh, we got settled in the cabins. And it's another thing. How did she ever find her way around the boat because it was a huge thing. Then keeping, oh, she tied us together. She tied us together. I'll never forget that. We thought, that, that hurt me, To be tied, How could she. DANE: Tell me, so you, was that on the boat or on the wharf would she-- SMITH: On the wharf when we got on the boat. She tied us together so she could keep us, keep, uh, track of us because I was always off somewhere else. My brother and my sister were much better. Well Chris, my brother, was very little. But my sister was far more timid. She still is. She always was like that. DANE: You were eleven. How old were you all? SMITH: Uh, let's see, my sister was about, she must have been nine, or eight. And my brother was much younger. He was about four or five, Four I think. DANE: And how did she tie you, with-- SMITH: Just rope. She had rope and she decided to tie us together. Well, don't forget, now she had us on the train all this time and she, I guess she had enough of that running around stuff. So, uh, but we were on the train a long, long time. But I don't think we were on the train overnight. It didn't seem so. The trains are very fast over there anyway. DANE: Did she tie you around the wrists or around the waist? SMITH: Around the waist. Yeah. (They laugh.) And then, uh, I just remember the cabins, I remember it's very small and I remember the beds, one on top of the other. And then, uh, the only other thing I remember was the beautiful days and me running all over the ship and, uh, I remember being, my mother always took us in to breakfast and after breakfast she never knew where I was. Uh, someone was always, uh, you know, getting a hold of me and bringing me back to her though, I can remember that. So I never seemed to get lost, really. DANE: There was no steerage as in one common place. SMITH: Yes, there, no, there were three, now this was a much better boat than the one my father went on. And this was May, where my father went in December. So the weather was much nicer. And the boat was much nicer. It only had like, uh, a first and second class or maybe it had third class too, I don't know. But, uh, I know we were like, uh, second class. So we had a cabin and we, uh, it was very nice, we had a big dining hall, I remember the hall, it was huge. The food was very good. And, uh, I can't, it was just fun, it was just fun for me. DANE: Would you see other people moving to America, other immigrants on the boat, were you-- SMITH: Oh there were loads of immigrants, oh, yes. There was lots of people. And I can remember looking down over the, uh, deck I was on. I could see these other people down below and they looked like the people you see in pictures a long, uh, from a long time ago with the babushkas and the, uh, they weren't dressed, really, as nice, and, I thought to myself, "This must have been the way my father came. And this is how he had to be." But they were all like packed. Now we had chairs to sit on deck. They didn't have any chairs, there was just the benches that were lined along the edge of the boat. DANE: Did they look sad to you? SMITH: Uh, no, they seemed to be talking. They were all talking, but it's all different language. Even where we were. It's all different languages people were all different, uh, they were dressed fairly well, but, uh, the language knew, it wasn't any language that I ever heard. They were a few German speaking, only there were german speaking friends. Because once you got on the boat there, I imagine my mother met these different people and the one's who spoke German you sort of, they sort of got together. So, uh, there was German speaking, but it was the way they spoke German. It was high German, you know, the regular German, it wasn't the Swiss German. DANE: Meals. Would you have three meals a day and go into the-- SMITH: We'd have three meals a day. DANE: Do you remember what they'd feed you? SMITH: No, I don't remember what we ate. It must have been fairly similar to what we had at home because I didn't, I don't remember the difference. DANE: Uh-huh. During the day, would you, did you make friends with anyone on the boat or did you-- SMITH: No children, no. I was a loner. I, I love to wander around all over the place and I can't remember ever, uh, making friends with any, uh, with any other little children. I really don't. DANE: How long were you on the ship? SMITH: About a week. It wasn't very long. DANE: And pleasant, it seems. SMITH: It was pleasant. And evidently most of the days that we had were nice days. But in May it would be anyway. DANE: Uh-huh. Then you pull into New York Harbor, do you remember seeing the Statue of Liberty? SMITH: Oh wait, I'll tell you about that. Uh, the last night on the boat they had a big dance. And, uh, my mother, I can remember my mother getting all dressed up for that dance. She was looking forward to it. She loved dancing more than she'd eat. She'd rather dance than eat. So, uh, she told us, she got all dressed in our night clothes and she asked me, I was supposed to babysit. She asked the other two to be very good and she would only be gone for a little while. She said where she was going and that we should behave ourselves and stay in the cabin. So, she'd no long, she must have gotten enough, enough time went by so she could have gotten to the dance hall, or the hall or this big, it was the dining area actually. So, uh, we could hear the music. And my brother started crying, my sister started crying, I was trying to keep them quiet and it finally ended up, where all three of us, in our night clothes followed the music and went up and my poor mother never even got a chance to dance. For her the dance was over before it even began because we wouldn't stay quiet. And I'll never forget that, my poor mother who was sick all the way over and here she is, going to have a good time, her last night. She couldn't even do that. And we could still hear the orchestra. I can still hear the orchestra. But anyway, she tucked us in bed and she stayed there as far as I know because I fell asleep. But I woke up during the night, sometime, looking out the port hole, you could see these lights. Now this wasn't, this wasn't stars, you could see the lights along, so we knew where we were, we hit the shore line, somewhere. And then the next morning we got dressed, went to breakfast, and shortly after that we passed the Statue of Liberty. And we could see, uh, I can still remember people who were, you know, that feeling of something very exciting came through although we didn't know that much about it. I didn't know what the Statue of Liberty was. And then we'd see. we passed the Statue of Liberty and people would be crying and they would be talking excitedly and, uh, we just, it just, I don't know. Although we didn't know what it was all about, we realized that there was something great really going on. And then shortly after that, the, uh, boat stopped and this other little boat came to the big boat and we all had to get on. It took a long time for everybody to get off the boat and then get to Ellis Island. DANE: Now why was it you were brought to Ellis Island? You were traveling second class, do you-- SMITH: We still had, everybody went there. And, uh, we, I can remember going in and then going through long narrow, uh, oh what it reminds me of if you go to, if you go to the World's Fair or if you go to Disneyland you go up this way and down this way and up this way, well it was chutes like that. To me, it looked like a cattle chute, you know. But it wasn't, of course. And there were all kinds of people and here again my mother tied us up so that we were all together. And she had my brother by the hand and then my sister and then myself brought up the rear. And we went through these long narrow places. And here she is carrying a suitcase and us and, oh, and we were all dressed nice too. DANE: Did you have special clothes for your arrival to America? SMITH: Well, we had, uh, it was sort of a wool dress with a lace collar. Nothing real special. Not Swiss, not our, uh, no, like those drindles, like you call them. It's just regular clothes, but, after we got out of the chutes, there were little rooms all along and they'd take you in this little room and then they'd ask you questions and most of the time there was no interpreter we didn't know what the questions were all about. We had to take our clothes of and they made sure we didn't have any skin diseases or anything and I had long hair so it was always braided on top of my head. I remember I had to let my hair down. And they looked through our hair for lice or something. I don't know what. And then, uh, we finally got all dressed again, my mother got all dressed again and we did, and then she took us again. We went through some more long narrow passages. And then we sat at tables and they asked more questions. This is so dark, it was so dreary and cold. It was damp, maybe it was a nice day outside, I don't know but it was, anyway, it was cool and it was very dirty and we couldn't figure out why it would be so dirty. Well coming off the boat, everything on the boat was clean. So probably we noticed it a lot more. And finally we entered this great big hall where we had to wait on wooden benches. And the, well here again I'm saying, the hall is huge and it seemed like it was very, very big, but I was a kid. Maybe it wasn't really that big. I have never been back. DANE: It is big. SMITH: It is big. But, anyway, we had to wait there. And the longer we waited, the more worried my mother got. Because we thought, there were a lot of people there that were sent back because of something that wasn't right. Their papers weren't right. They were sick. A lot of the people were sick coming over because some people can't take boat trips no matter how calm it is. And some were even sick before they got on the boat. And, of course, we still had our arms swollen up. We had scabs all over our arms. But, uh, that didn't seem to bother us the biggest fever that we ever had was at home when we were still there. So we waited there all day, we didn't have anything to eat. My poor mother had to make I don't know how many trips to the bathroom with us. And by this time, by the end of the day we're pretty dragged out and dirty and, uh, finally this Mr. Donner came to meet us from New York. And we were so happy to see him but we couldn't figure out why my father wasn't there. Right away mother burst into tears, "Where's father, where's father?" So, uh, Mr. Donner told us he had missed either the bus or train or something anyway and that's why he couldn't be here. So Mr. Donner came and got us. And we got in a taxi and, uh, the taxi driver was Black. And we had never seen a Black man before. And my mother was scared and she started crying. And then all these huge buildings and all the cars and the traffic and, uh, noise. It was, it was just. ah, everything was just too much. (She laughs.) Finally he got to a hotel and uh, least it was a little more quiet in the hotel. I remember going on an elevator and getting, we must have been two or three floors up anyway, more than on the first floor and we, uh, my mother got us all washed up and Mr. Donner left again to try and, uh, meet my father wherever he was supposed to meet him and my mother got us all washed up into clean clothes we had a nice clean apron on, pinafore and, uh, I can remember my brother had white trousers, white pants on, little short pants. And we were supposed to stay put and then my mother was getting washed up. We got out into the hallway, I can remember this hallway, there was an end, uh, end of the hallway, there was a window, the window had a screen and we came to the screen we looked, "Oh look out there. Look at all those things." We put our hands on the screens we came away, we didn't look at our hands. And, of course, our hands were wiping on out, on our dress, clothes again, all over our faces and when we got back to mother I thought she'd die. We had soot, this black soot all over us. Then shortly after that my father came in with Mr. Donner and everybody was happy. And eventually we were put on a train and we were brought and ended up at this, it was a little town farm. Do you know what a town farm is? DANE: No. SMITH: Well, they had one here in Enfield a long time ago. The old people nowadays they have these centers for the elderly, in those days they had the town farm. The old people and people who didn't have a job came to this big, uh, it was a farm. And they were allowed a room and they were given meals and a place to stay in return for which they worked a little bit. If they were old and had no kinfolk that's where they stayed and they lived out their days. If they were sick they got a doctor's care. But this is what is know as a town farm. This is where my father worked as a herdsman. He took care of the barns and the cattle. And so we came there eventually. And, uh, the house was bare, no furniture. I had, uh, then mother eventually, my mother got, they got chairs and tables and I don't know where they got them, I'll never remember that. I can remember one time, uh, they used to go into town, like once a month. Now, how they got there, oh, they went there with the overseer of the whole farm. And he'd come back with cookies in big boxes like this. And we, uh, he hide them. She hid them, uh, we thought, she hid them way on top. Now they had a pantry. Do you know what a pantry is? Okay, she'd hide them on the top shelf of the pantry. We weren't supposed to get those cookies unless she dished them out to us. One day I climbed up, so you had to climb up on the counter and then there were two more shelves in order to get up to the top shelf. And this is what I did. And then when I reached the top shelf, there, she had matches way up on the top shelf. Before I hit the cookies, I hit the matches. The matches fell down on the floor, they burst into flames. And my sister ran out, and she was screaming and screaming, somebody came in and out the water, the, uh, flame out. But anyway, that's the cookie dish. Cookie idea. Then we went to school there. And it was a one room schoolhouse where there were about eight grades to one teacher. Because this was a very countrified place. Cotterkill was a very little town. And, of course, we knew no English at all. Neither did my mother, neither did my father. Well, my father, by this time, knew a few words of English, but not enough to teach us anything. We went to school and, of course, the children all had a ball because they told us, "Say this," and we'd say it. And then everybody would laugh and we thought, "Oh, aren't we great." But we really weren't because the children were giving us all the wrong words. Or they'd say, "Say this to the teacher." Luckily the teacher was very understanding and she realized what the children were doing. DANE: When did you catch on that they were sort of playing games with you in your language? SMITH: Uh, we had one very good friend. His name was Simon, but I can't remember what his other name was. But I do remember his name was Simon. And he, uh, I don't know why, he befriended us. And he's the one who said, who would shake his head when the children would tell us to say something. And finally we realized that it wasn't really a;ways a good thing to say what the other children told us to say. Eventually, somehow, we learned the language. DANE: Was it difficult? Do you remember being frustrated or as a child it just came so easily? SMITH: No, it didn't really come easily. Many times we went home and cried. Because we didn't understand it and everything was so new to us. We stayed in Cotterkill for a year and a half and then, uh, my father heard of a better position where he would be a herdsman for a private place. A private owner who had cattle. And we moved to Mt. Marion. That's another small town. And there we found, uh, found life a little bit easier. DANE: How about your mother. You left this beautiful Swiss town, and now you were in strange, you know, the kids were coming home because they couldn't understand. SMITH: My mother had no friends. No one to talk to. DANE: Was she glad to be here? SMITH: No she wasn't. And even after we moved from there and moved to this other place. She wasn't too happy about the whole thing. She was never happy. She wasn't happy even after we moved up here to Enfield. Because she had no one and she couldn't mix. She was, uh, she didn't like, she thought, uh, she felt very self conscious about not knowing the language. Not being able to speak English as well. My father it didn't seem to make any, to make much difference. But then. of course, he had to get out into the world. He had to earn a living. So he couldn't do anything about it. (Telephone rings.) Just let it ring. So anyway, uh, she, uh, when we lived there-- DANE: Hold on just a second. Dean, you want to stop? (Tape stops.) SMITH: Okay, we lived there for two more years in Mt. Marion and then this, uh, German Gentleman, gentleman, I hate that word for him. He came along and he promised my father if we'd move here to Enfield, he would give him the farm as long as he would let him, uh, have a room here, or while, uh, as long as this Mr. Hedrick, his name was, lived, he would have a room here then my father would eventually have the farm. Now this is just one of the many things that turned me against ever getting my citizenship papers. (She laughs.) So everything that glittered was not gold. He, uh, we came here to live and when we moved here I can remember walking up the dirt road. It was raining, my mother had us all dressed up nice and we cried all the way. We had to move, we had to drive from Enfield Street, we drove, I mean on a bus, we came to Enfield. Then from there we had to walk about, what is it, about three miles I think, to here. My father's farm is over there. It's not very far from here. But anyway, uh, we came here and the person who had the farm before us had bought it but couldn't pay the mortgage. And so this Mr. Hedrick kicked this man off the farm. Now, there was an enemy right there. We were to live right across from him? Then on top of that, it was still this German deal. Anything sounding German was bad. And we felt, we felt it in school but not so much. By the time we came to school here, we realized what was going on and no one liked my father. And because of this, they didn't even give him a chance. Around here there was all Polish people. They didn't like him. So, uh, not because it was he, but because he was German. And eventually, uh, my father made a place for himself and he worked on tobacco as we did when we were kids. He, uh, raised the tobacco for this man who said that he would eventually give him the farm and then the man married. His wife decided she wanted the farm. She had two sons, they wanted the farm. And it ended up, so my father could have bought, the money he paid to finally finalize this thing, after Mr. Hedrick's death. He could have bought the farm twice over. He had to pay I don't know how many different people off. Now that turned him bitter. It turned me bitter. Another thing that happened. He patented. He mad a patent to, uh, plant grass on what is now Kennedy Airport. This man came in from New York and asked him to, uh, make this machine. So he made it, the guy said he would patent it in his name, then he took off, and, uh, my father never saw the machine again. Never found, never found the man again. So there was no patent or anything. The guy took the patent and put it in his own name, I guess. Anyway, there's another bad thing. There were a lot of things like that that happened to my father that turned me so against ever getting to become a citizen. So finally my father said, "Look, I'll take you to Switzerland again with me, and when we come, but if I do when we come back, you ought to get your citizenship papers." In order to make the trip, I promised my father, yes I turn, I'd get my citizenship papers when I got back and that's what I did. In 1956 I got my citizenship papers. But it was very hard for him. It was very hard for my mother. So it wasn't all wonderful, wonderful, wonderful. DANE: Do you wish they'd stayed in Switzerland? SMITH: Well, I've been back so many times if my family and my roots, you know, everybody wasn't here I would stay here. I love it there. And there's something about it that tugs me back all the time. I no sooner hit the border and I'm bawling because just, the emotion, I can never explain it. And yet my sister would never want to go back. Not even for a visit. Nor would my brother. DANE: Why do you think it strikes you more? SMITH: I don't know, I will never figure that one out. But it does. DANE: And the fact that you didn't get your citizenship until you were much older because you felt bitter about how you were treated that you were prejudiced against. SMITH: Yes, yes, not because we were us but why should they treat us that way because we, uh, were German sounding. I couldn't, I never could figure that out. But you see, they have prejudices here, now, even with uh, it doesn't make any difference, whether it's German or what it is. It works the same way. I, I've met it, I've come across it so many times. DANE: Look at the Blacks. SMITH: Yeah, for instance. DANE: It's true. It is true. Do you consider yourself more Swiss than American? SMITH: No. I couldn't say that. No, I couldn't say that. I've grown up here. Well, I was what, eleven when I came over, I'm seventy now. No way. But the roots are still there. Inside you're still there. And once you leave Swiss, uh, Switzerland even if you become a citizen of another country, you're still a citizen of that country. They never let you go. They never turn you out. (She laughs.) DANE: I think that's great. How much time, Dean? Okay, why don't we stop. This is the end of side two, Gertrude Schneider Smith, Interview Number 171, it's 4:25.