APPEL: This is Willa appel. I'm speaking with William Solyom on Tuesday, February 11th, 1986. We're beginning the interview at noon and we're going to talk with mr. Solyom about his experience of emigrating from Hungary in 1912 when he was 12 years old. Mr Solyom, maybe we can begin by you, if you could tell me a little bit about the town where you grew up and what that was like. SOLYOM: Yes. Um, Fiume is the town that I grew up in. But I was born in Bihor in Central Hungary in what is known today as Transylvania. And, but I recall very little about that, one or two incidents, you know, it isn't worth mentioning, but my father was Chief of Police there at the time after he retired from the army. He also had a Captain's rating in the Austria-Hungary army. So-- APPEL: That was in Bihor before you moved to Fiume? SOLYOM: That's right. We moved to Fiume and ah, actually we broke our trip from Bihor to Fiume because you just couldn't go in, in those days you couldn't go across any state lines or anything like that, you know, without going through a lot of red tape. and so the other alternative is to, to ah sneak across the best way you can. And to do that, you know, you have to stop for several months, you know, and establish a home. An address. And then continue on. APPEL: How long did you live in Fiume? SOLYOM: Six years. It was a lengthy thing, you know, to get out of where we were, you know, in Central Hungary, and ah, and to finally get a visa, you know, to be able to clear. APPEL: I guess I'm not following. Was your move from Bihor to Fiume part of your family's desire to emigrate to the United States? SOLYOM: It was part of the plan, that's right. APPEL: It was the first step. SOLYOM: Yes, the first step. APPEL: Why did your family want to emigrate? SOLYOM: Well, it's just that, I think probably the same thing could be answered by anyone that leaves. They want to get out from the yoke of, of the, the people that run the country. You don't have anything to say about electing officers, you know. The way a kingdom is handled, you know, that it's all of these jobs, you know, are given out to certain individuals and he's responsible to keep peace and to, so that things work, run smoothly, you know. And if you got on the wrong side of one of these people, you know, why it would be terrible, you know. No matter what you did you couldn't find favor with the guy, you know. APPEL: But if your father was the Chief of Police it sounds like your family was-- SOLYOM: No, he was still, had to answer to the army as well as the civil organization, you know, that run the place. And ah, the trend was, you know, you talk to almost any European, this coming to America or to Argentina, a lot of them went to Argentina, you know, at that time. That was their goal, you know. APPEL: So your father had decided to emigrate way before the beginning of World War One. SOLYOM: Oh yes. Of course I, I don't know about those things because of being a child, you know. They wouldn't divulge anything like that, you know. In fact of matter they would be afraid to say anything because accidentally a child might give it away and you know, and people that are looking for that kind of information are very eager, you know, to get that information from the family members, you know. So I, all I remember is just the good times, you know. I remember when he with his job, you know, being Chief of Police there like that, you know, his home was furnished. It was quite a nice home. It was a big yard, you know, had deers on it, you know. And um, it had, our supper meals, you know, after we got through, the gypsies, you know, they came and played the gypsy music for us and then whatever was on, left on the table, you know, they, that was their wages for doing that. So it was, it was a nice way of living but you didn't have any freedom. APPEL: Do you know what, was there any specific person or event that prompted your family's desire to come here? SOLYOM: I wouldn't know that. I really wouldn't know that. My mother's brother was lawyer in Nagy Szollos, which is big grapes, translated to that, you know. APPEL: Can you spell that? SOLYOM: Nagy, N-A-G-Y. Szollos is S-Z-O-L-L-O-S with two dots on it and two L's and then again an O with two dots and then S. (S-Z-O-L-L-O-S). Nagy Szollos. It's named because they raise big grapes, that's what it translates to. And so there was some talk the, you know, deciding, you know, that they were going to go, you know. And they kept that pretty much to themselves and I didn't know that we were going to America until we actually started going to America, you know. So we, I just, I never heard him talk about it. APPEL: I notice that you are a Hungarian Protestant. SOLYOM: Protestant. Yeah, we were Reformatush. This was during the time, you know, when the reform was taking place too, you know. It was another thing that happened in Central Europe, you know. Of course I didn't know too much about it because we, well, we went down to Fiume, Fiume, as you know is, Italy is right here and Austria is right there and Czechoslovakia is right in there, you know. So most of them are Catholics. Predominantly before that, you know, most everybody was Catholic. The same Hungarian that I told about here, Bennet, you know, he's Catholic, you know. And he went to Canada, you know, Saskatchewan. APPEL: So your family first went to Fiume? SOLYOM: No, not first. That was the ultimate goal. That was the seaport town. We stopped in Zimonya and Belgrade. We established home in each of those towns before we continued out journey. It took quite a long time, you know, before we got to our point of de, embarkation, you know. APPEL: Can you tell me, explain to me why you had to establish a home in each of those places? SOLYOM: I really can't tell you. I wouldn't know that. See, I wasn't in, I wasn't even twelve, I must have been around eight or nine years old APPEL: So you left Bihor when you were about six and then moved to these different places.. SOLYOM: That's right. APPLE: And about how old were you when you got to Fiume? SOLYOM: Well ah, it just, we weren't in there very long. I don't know how long a period it was, you know, but we went, I went to school there, you see. You can almost, there's some dates on that report card. But that is the last one that I got. I don't know what's become of the rest of them. I was just surprised that I was able to get this much, you know, and it wasn't until my mother died. Did you see a picture of my mother over there? APPEL: I'll look later. SOLYOM: Yeah. She was a very strong willed woman, you know. She was physically strong too, you know. I had plenty of problems with my mother, I'll tell you (he laughs). No, I, being the oldest, I was always responsible for my brothers, you know. My brother Charles was born over there. He doesn't know anything about that. He was born over in Fiume. And um, in fact of matter, just before we left, you know, is when he was born because he was a nursing baby, you know, when he was on the ship, see. APPEL: When did you find out that you were coming to America? SOLYOM: The day we left. That's how tightly they guarded that sort of thing. Yeah. APPEL: Do you remember what you felt about coming to America? SOLYOM: Well, it was some kind of of a mystic area that we, we never even got that far in geography, you know, about where America was. Ah, you would hear all kinds of tales about it. Either from the Italians, he says, "Oh, don't go over there, you know, because over there they eat you over there, you know." See. So that's, that's the kind of, you had to have a pretty strong mind, you know, to overcome that and go. There's a lot of them, almost all the Catholics went directly to South America, you know. APPEL: You had never met anyone who had been to America before you went? SOLYOM: no. You know, it's funny thing, we never did have very much friendship, I mean company, you know, there. When we got here, yes. APPEL: Was that also because of your fear of-- SOLYOM: Fear, that's right. See, my father graduated from the University of Debrecen, you know. And he, he made the mistake of not coming to California right away. Because he knew the horticulture of the grape industry, you know. He understood grafting and this sort of thing, you know. And grapes now, by grafting different kinds, you know, you can come up with a very fine fruit, you know. And in fact of matter there was one from the same area that we came, his name is Augusto Horastie. He's in the California history books, you know. And he came over here, you know, and he, in fact of matter he's the one that developed the grape, you know., to make Zinfandel wine out of it. And so this Hungarian tongue every once in a while gets me into trouble, you know, it gets pretty thick, you know. APPEL: So you found out that you were coming to America on the day you left. SOLYOM: On the day we left. You know, I suspicioned that when we got this new garment that you saw, that was our going away garment, you know. And, you know, the people on the ship, you know, when we finally came, started getting out into the wide ocean, you know, see, when we left Fiume we made a number of stops along the boot of Italy, you know. Venice was one of the major, Messina is another place we stopped, you know. And we stopped for hours, you know. Not days, you know. And they, the vendors, you know, came right next to the ship, you know, sold fruit, one thing and another you just hawked it up, you know, and put the money in the basket, that sort of a thing. APPEL: Do you remember the name of the ship? SOLYOM: Yeah, the Carpathia. APPEL: The Carpathia. SOLYOM: The Carpathia is, the ship, you know, that picked up the survivors of the Titanic. Carpathia was coming from United States toward Europe and the Titanic was going to United States. and then they hit that iceberg, you know, and incidentally when we came across that spot when we were once on the open ocean, they told us, "This is where the Titanic went down." And, you know, there wasn't any joyfulness about this trip, you know, then, for a long time everybody walked around on their tip toes, you know, and never said very much of anything. They were so frightened, you know, that it could happen to them, see? APPEL: What time of year was it that you, of your passage? SOLYOM: It was. I think it was either July or August. APPEL: And do you recall where you slept, what your accommodations were like on board ship? SOLYOM: See, they were, I say July and August because, see, the icebergs were just having their calves, they call it calves, you know,when they break off, see. And the, see, when the summer has already gone, and that's when, when the icebergs were broken loose, you know, and they started coming down to the south. And so, but being kids, you know, we'd never paid any attention to the severity of the, of what happened to these people, you know. But this is where it went down, so that, and you know what? This Titanic thing keeps bopping up all the time. Even juts very recently, now they've taken pictures, they went down there, they took pictures at that three mile deep. I think it's three miles, could be five, I don't remember now. But they're talking about somebody is going to go down and get that because it's supposed to have a lot of gold bullion on it. But I don't know whether that will ever be, at least not in our age. APPEL: Perhaps not. What class was your family traveling? SOLYOM: Second class. APPEL: And what was that like? SOLYOM: Well, second class was just one deck below the first class, you know. And we had the run, the full run of the ship, you know. And we used to, us boys used to run almost every day we'd go down and see the, down in the hold, you know, that's where they, what do they call that? Steerage. And that's, you slept there and everything. All your goods was there, you know. Right around you. And you slept and ate right in that one spot that's assigned to you. APPEL: What did that, how did that, what did that look like to you? SOLYOM: Well, we wondered why those people that were down there in that cold part of the ship, you know, because it was below the waterline of the ship, you know, and we wondered why those people had to stay there, you know. And they, we, of course, if they did tell us why, it didn't make any impression on us. But, and they were cheerful, you know. We could hear some of those Roumanians, you know, they kept singing different chanting like songs, you know. And they entertained themselves. And they were nice looking people too, you know. Very robust, you know. Well built people. And so ah, then to continue on with the ocean voyage, you know, this is after we started getting near the, what do you call it, the Continental America, you know, why, one day somebody said, "There's the Statue of Liberty there." You know. So we kids started looking all over. We didn't see nothing, you know. And later we found out, you know, that it was a little speck, you know, on our horizon, see? And it was still a good day's traveling away from the Statue of Liberty, you know. But then as we got close enough and we began to see the, see the Statue as it is, you know, and finally we pulled up along side of it and the thing that impressed me is why people were crying, you know. When this is where they wanted to come. But they were crying. And getting down on their knees and praying, you know, in their own language, you know, that here, I could understand the Hungarians and the Italians, you know, that they have finally arrived in the land of freedom. That they can do what they want to do and work wherever they want to go and work, you know. This is a very important thing, you know. So, after a while, you know, we, I'd forgotten it was quite late in the afternoon that we came to Ellis Island. APPEL: Was your family, your parents also emotional about the Statue of Liberty? SOLYOM: Well, it was just my mother, you know. My father came ahead of us. Six months ahead of us. And ah, and he didn't, when he came across he came over on the Mauritania, you know. And ah, the quota was filled. See, he didn't have a visa and the quota was filled for that country, you know. And so the, the Cunard Line, you know, was good enough to take these people that were turned down for some reason or another and took them up to Canada and unloaded them there, you know. And there my father, little by little, you know, would work his way down toward Detroit, you know, and they came across there. See, they didn't watch the border too close in those days, you know. They did in coming over because there was some families that were turned back and they had to go back to the old country because of some ailment , disease that they had, see. And you had to a have a clean bill of health, you know, before they would accept you. And oh gosh, I can remember those women crying, just terribly, you know, and we wondered what was the matter, why they were crying. Later on my mother told me, you know, that they cannot come to this country because they got something the matter with them and they don't want us to catch it over here, see. And so, and that's the way it was too, for us, you know. As we sat there, when you went to Ellis Island, when we got off the ship, you were given about a ten by ten area, you know, to put all your goods that you brought with you, you know. And you stayed there until they were all through with it and then from time to time there were officers, you know, doctors and officers and God only knows what they were, you know. But they'd come and they'd look at the parcels, they'd empty everything out and put it all back in, you know. Look at your eyes. Vaccination marks, see whether you were vaccinated or not, you know. Well, you know, and this took quite, nearly the whole day. you know. APPEL: But you stayed in one spot? SOLYOM: We didn't, the kids. But my mother had to stay, God bless her, you know, she had to stay there and watch her goods, you know, for one thing, because, you know, it was a very good chance to lose your things. So um, then we, us kids would run around all over and every once in a while I'd come back with my brothers, you know, and check in with my mother. She said, "Baila, (in Hungarian)." She said, "Look out for your brothers." APPEL: And what impression did Ellis Island make on you? SOLYOM: Well, it's just a huge building. I never was in such a building before in my life, you know. It was quite empty, you know, when we got there, you know. But then everybody had a spot, you know, and you had to stay in that spot, you know, so that when these doctors came in there they wouldn't have to wait and do it over again, see. Well, that's the impression that we had and then towards evening, you know, we had, they took us over to New York, the mainland there, you know, and was put on the train, 20th Century Limited to Chicago, you know. APPEL: Just going back to Ellis Island for a minute, did you have anything to eat during the day? SOLYOM: Well, yes. We were given rations, you know, on the ship, you know, when we left, you know. And then this is what we ate. And there was vendors, too, you know, going through there, you know, that you could buy things from. APPEL: And in the spot where your mother and baggage was, was there a bench, some place to sit down? SOLYOM: No, no, you sat on your haunches or on a bag or whatever you had over there, you know. APPEL: And the doctors came there to examine you. SOLYOM: The doctors and the officers, you know, they came and filled out the necessary papers, you know, and ah, and this is as much as I can remember about that. APPEL; Were you personally examined or asked questions? SOLYOM: Yes. Not questions. They didn't ask kids any questions at all, you know, they just, the adults, you know. And they had to have, show, I guess on that paper that you picked up, you know, it shows what kind of vaccinations you had and when you had it, you know, and one thing and another like that. So then there was another thrill there when we got on the train and they started really traveling, you know, the conductor said to me, he said, "You want to see something?" We didn't know what he was talking about. And he waved us over there, you know, and I didn't know whether to go with or not, you know. And, but we did. He was smiling, you know. So he took us to the front of the car and he showed us down there, you know, where there's a trough, you know. And the train was scooping the water out of the trough, you know, to replenish the water for the boilers, you know, to make steam. Well, you know, when this paddle was going in there you can imagine with the speed of the train, you know, that the water was flying everywhere. Even the mist was coming in between the cars, you know. Oh, it was quite a thrill. And then of course when we got to Chicago, that's another thing. We couldn't understand why all these cars, all Chicago, Chicago, Chicago. We didn't even know what it meant. Well, nobody knew what it was and later on we learned, you know, that it was an Indian word, you know. APPEL: Were you traveling with your family, were there other Hungarians or people from Fiume who were traveling with you to Chicago? SOLYOM: No, I don't remember of anybody, you know. Yo pretty, stayed pretty much to yourselves, you know. APPEL: And what was the train like? You slept some place? SOLYOM: Well, it was a whole lot better train than the one we came across Hungary there, you know. Those rickety little cars, you know, they didn't even look like a railroad, railway cars, you know. And the, after we left Chicago, of course, they tried to tell us, you know, that there's a lot of Hungarians in Gary, you know, they were telling us in Hungarian. And ah, but he said, "Don't go there." He said, "It's a bad place. You'll get consumption right away, you know, from the sand, you know." (He laughs.) It wasn't so at all. Because, you know, they treated the sand with oil, you know, so that it can't get dusty, you know. APPEL: We're going to break right here to turn over. This is the end of side one of the interview with William Solyom. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO APPEL: This is the beginning of side two of the interview with William Solyom. Do you remember what impressions you had of America as you were traveling across the country? SOLYOM: Well, we, well, of course the speed of the train, mainly, you know. We were, we never traveled that fast, you know. And it was kind of alarming, you know, when you get on it, to see how fast trains travel here compared to what they travel over there. Over there they stop for almost anything and everything, you know. But after we left Chicago it, we just had a little short ride on the Northwestern and it carried us to Elgin, Illinois. And this is where my father already had a home for us. By this time, you know, why, he had everything. We couldn't have started, you know, or we wouldn't have left Europe until he was established definitely in one place. So um, ah, then the next thing that had to be settled right away was school. And we couldn't talk a word of English, you know. And we ah, we talked to the neighbor across the street and they happened to be Catholics, you know. So they, the nearest school to that area was a Catholic School. So there we went to school. It was a German Parochial School, you know. And we, we learned German in the morning and American in the afternoon, you know. And so we, this went on for about eight months, something like that. Then Dad decided that because we had a large family, you know, that we would go out on the edge of town of Elgin, which he did. He went and bought four lots, side by side and we turned all that into garden area. But we had to clear the land, cut down trees, you know. They had huge trees, tamarack trees, you know, and some ash trees, and, let's see, there was one other kind. Oh, box elder. It's a nothing kind of a tree. And it didn't even make good burning fuel. And we got some chickens and we started this then we cleared the land and we started gardening and we, our boyhood days was, came to an end there, you know, during the time that we stayed there. In fact of matter, by the time I got to be nineteen years old, you know, I enlisted in the army, you know. APPEL: Did you continue to go to school after you moved? SOLYOM: Oh sure. Sure, we continued to go to school, you know, but this, when he acquired this land, these four lots, we had to change schools again, see. And the nearest school was a grammar school. And the Washington School. And so we lived on, well, until I went in the army, you know, I went in there and enlisted, you know, and sent the money home to mother, you know. Every penny of it. I never spent a cent of it. And-- APPEL; Did you have any kind of problems adjusting when you first moved into Elgin? SOLYOM: I can't remember any problems at all. We picked up the languages like nothing, you know, and by this time, you know, we was, we started English, you know. And all of us kids was pretty athletically inclined, even then, you know. As you can see by some of the pictures over there. And we played baseball with the kids, you know, it was a funny thing, you know, we'd use any one of the words of the four languages, you know. And we mixed them up, you know. Because some words are easier in some languages than in others, you know. And you know when we played with these kids, these English speaking kids, you know, why they just, they didn't know what we were saying, you know. And we, I didn't have very much patience with them either. I expected them to know what was to be done, you know. APPEL: Well, you certainly didn't feel intimidated then? SOLYOM: No, we didn't. We did alright. And then when I went into the army, you know, that's when, well, even before I went in the army, you know, I, there was Greek that owned the Elgin Fruit and Candy Company, downtown. They owned some lots below us, you know. And once a week they used to come out to get in the front for fresh air and sunshine because, you know, down in their factory they lived there. They cooked there, you know, and they did their business, you know. And so they took turns coming out there, you know, and my mother nailed this one boss, you know. And he says, " got a boy over there that I want you to give him a job." You know. And ah, so the first thing you know I was to go down there, he says, on a certain day you go down there. So I went down there, you know, and they put a white apron on me, you know, and started washing dishes. I washed dishes until you wouldn't believe it. Especially at night on Saturday night, you know. When the show let out, the last show let out, everybody comes into the, of course, prohibition was on then, you know, and so everybody was eating ice cream and having sodas, you know. And so I washed the dishes until the wee hours of the morning and then walked home a mile and a half, you know, to our home. APPEL: When you first came over to America do you recall that you were homesick at all for the old country? SOLYOM: Not at all. We were just enjoying it, you know, we never walked, even. We always ran every place. I'd look back every once in a while to see, to orient myself where I was, because that was a lot of people, you know, when one of them big ships unloaded. And so, and then I had a command of my younger brother, together, so that we'd be together, you know. Ah, so ah, so it went. Oh, later on, you know, after I got through and learned to do the dishes real well, you know, little by little, you know, they used me a soda jerker, you know. And oh, I thought that was great, you know. APPEL: And were your parents equally pleased to be in America? SOLYOM: No. They never learned the language enough to really appreciate America. My mother did pretty well, you know. She finally, she got along pretty well, you know. The school people, the teachers at the school, the last particularly, they went out of their way and they come to visit us. Ah, to see how we were doing. They were concerned. And we, we had them come at different times and we had, well, see, my cadet suit, she, one of these teachers, and Wiggle, this friend of hers, you know, Major Small, you know. He was a retired army officer. And he was telling us about it and the first thing you know I was supposed to go down to the tailor shop, you know, and get measured up for a suit. So that's how come I got into the cadets, see? APPEL: But your parents didn't adjust so well? SOLYOM: No, my father especially. He had a terrible time adjusting, you know. He never did adjust very good, you know. APPEL: Even though he wanted to come here because of the freedom? SOLYOM: Yes. Well, he enjoyed that. He enjoyed that because after a while, you know, we started courting girls, you know, and see my wife's family was a big family too, and we used to go out to edge of town there. By this time I met a friend over there, Robert Griffith, and he was a native of that country, Scotch people, you know. And so we, in fact of matter, I got him to go with Gerty's sister, my wife's sister. He was six foot three, you know, and she was five foot six, you know (he laughs). It's the funniest thing how nature plays some queer things, you know. But they got along just fine, you know. And he, he was successful, you know. From the little garage where he started for repairing cars, you know, he became a dealer for Ford Motor Company. APPEL: And how do you feel that this move to America affected your life when you think about it? SOLYOM: Well, I would have never had the opportunities to get to where I was, you know, in Hungary. In Hungary you're born to somebody, you know, and you're, you have the advantages that they had, or disadvantages, either way. And so the opportunities here were, you still had to work for it here, It wasn't handed to you on a silver platter, you know. You still had to work. and because we were able bodied we worked, I worked as an apprentice steam fitter for five years, you know. And for minimum pittance wages, you know. I worked like a dog. If you know what a steam fitter's job is, you know, carrying boiler sections and iron radiators and cutting and threading pipe, you know. And this is what I had to do, you know. And I learned the trade and I stuck with it and I learned it. And finally became President of the local union in Elgin. In fact of matter I became President of the Charleston local union, even down there too. The minute that they knew that I was Bill Solyom from so and so, and so I've done real well. This is how come I got into the Navy Yard. During the Depression, I got, there was no work to be had in the steam fitting. And I had, by this time, I had a little boy and a little girl. I got married and we started a family, you know, after I was apprenticing as a steam fitter. And so the, let's see, I lost my trend-- APPEL: You were telling me that there was opportunity here but you had to work very hard. SOLYOM: Yes. I had to work very hard. And then of course, oh yeah, the Depression came along. Well, you know that hit everybody, big and small, you know. Business man or tradesman or whatever he was, you know, it just, we, America was going through a terrible time. And I thought to myself. "Well, gee whiz, I'm gonna get into civil service." And so I sat down and I wrote a letter to every civil service commission that the United States had anything to do with. And the very first one that answered it, you know, and gave me a call, is to go to Charlestown, South Carolina. APPEL: And that's how you got there? SOLYOM: That's where I got there. And this is where I got my engineering. Did you see those diplomas hanging on the wall in there? APPEL: No, I'll come look right now. SOLYOM: Okay. Well, this is the Uncle Sam, you know, when I went down there and I, of course, I was union president there, and so they give me special treatment, you know. And they said, "Look, you know, we're gonna make a supervisor out of you and in order to do that you're gonna have to have a degree in mechanical engineering." And so, "Well, I don't have that." And he said, "Well, if you're willing to go along with us we'll arrange that." And so they did. They, one day, you know, one of the navy guys came over there and says, "Hey, Solyom," he said, "You're supposed to be in building 1135. You've got to go over there and report for introduction to shop supervision training." APPEL: We're just about done with the tape. SOLYOM: Again? APPEL: Again, so-- SOLYOM: Boy what a gabby guy I am. APPEL: So I want to thank you very much. I think it has been a very interesting conversation. This is the end of the interview with William Solyom.