DANE: This is Debbie Dane and I'm speaking with Cosma Sullivan on Friday, January 17, 1986. We're beginning the interview at 1:15 PM. We're about to interview Cosma Sullivan about her immigration experience from Italy, in 1905. She was seven years old and this is Interview Number 118. We're recording now, and I'm going to start at the very beginning. If you could tell me the name of the town that you were born in, and where it was Italy? SULLIVAN: In Italy? Uh, my name, the name of the town was Casano Delle Murge. D-E-L-L-E M-U-R-G-E. Which means the, uh, town of the hills. And it, it was on the Adriatic side. Right, uh, near Bari. About thirty miles from Bari. DANE: Was it a beautiful place? SULLIVAN: It was a small town. A very small town. My father had come, shall I go on? My father had come from, had gone to America. He was in Italy. And I remembered him when I was about three years of age. Uh, all at once he disappeared, and I couldn't understand why he disappeared. My mother never told me. Except four years later when she was there all by herself for four years with us four children. She said that dad had written for us to sell everything we owned and to come, uh, to, America. And so we had to go to Naples. And drive from this small town near Bari on a train to Naples. Which is almost, in those days, uh, a whole day traveling. And we, and we got to Naples. My mother had a cousin who was a policeman, escorted us. Anyway, we went to the, uh, port of embarkation and the people turned me down. Said that I, I just couldn't come to America due to the fact that I had a stigmatism. So my mother took us back to our town. And, uh, took us to the, uh, the eye doctor, and he said my eyes were perfect. But anyway, it was just a truce. We did this four times. The fourth time they remembered us. Oh, no, no, no, they said. No, no, just wouldn't, he wouldn't even talk to us. So my mother had to pay money. And give them money under the table. And we, the only passage we had was steerage. We couldn't get what we wanted. We wanted second class but we couldn't. But we were glad to get on it. Because we made four trips. Back and forth, all day. DANE: Would they examine your eyes? The first time when they found out you had a stigmatism? SULLIVAN: No, they just said that. And then, uh, I don't, I don't know what they call, found at that time. I, uh, in fact the doctor told my mother that my eyes were better than anybody else's. So, we got in steerage, and we were on the boat for eighteen days. It was a slow, and I think it was the trip, uh, it made.We arrived in, uh, Ellis Island, about Sunday. My father was supposed to have met us. But being Sunday, he didn't think the immigration authorities would let us off, because as a rule they, they go ahead and examine everything. But being that we had been on that boat so long, they decided to let us get off. But in the meantime, while we were on the boat, we enjoyed ourselves, because we were taken over by the captain of the boat. The captain of the boat loved us all. And used to have us at his table. Quite often. DANE: How did he come to know you? You were down in steerage. SULLIVAN: Well, uh, we just played, played as children. And we were so vivacious, and I think he kinda interested, the captain. And he, he became very friendly with us. So, when we're, when, when the night, when we arrived, the night when we got near Ellis Island, everybody was on board that morning. Everybody couldn't sleep. Early in the morning. And everybody was waiting for the signs to see land. And, of course, when they spotted it, people just yelled and screamed. And I remember the, the, the, uh, people, was, uh, all near the edge looking towards the shore. Well, we got into Ellis Island, and it was a cursory investigation. Just looked at our eyes. Just looked, didn't even examine them all. Just all we did is just walked, and all they did is lifted up the, uh, the trunks to see what we were carrying. Didn't even investigate anything. And shut it off. Because they wanted to get us off the boat. And in the meantime, my daddy was in New York, thinking he would meet us the following day, Monday. But the following day we had all, they put us on a train. So, we got on the train, the four children, and my mother. She couldn't speak a word of English. And as I, )She clears her throat.) I remember she, they asked her where she was going, she said, "Washington." And they were heading us for the state of Washington. Finally she remembered the address. So she took the address and showed it to them. And finally they realized that she meant Washington, D.C. So, we got on the, on the train and changed at Philadelphia. The children would go sound asleep. She'd wake one up and the other would fall sound asleep. She had a terrible time keeping us awake. Anyway, we changed in Philadelphia for a train to the city of Washington. And we arrived at four o'clock in the morning. At the, uh, Union Station. Which at that time was located at 6th and Pennsylvania Avenue. Which is, uh, Six, the Sixth of Pennsylvania Avenue from the peace monument. And we sat there, and sat, and finally somebody came and spoke to my mother in English. And she said, "No stand." She couldn't understand. So they brought an Italian man. And, uh, he said, uh, she showed him the address. And he said, "I'd be glad to take you. Take my push-cart. Put your sons on there. And I'll be glad to take you." So, my mother agreed. So, he got his push-cart and put the two boys on it. And most of our baggage had gone to the state of Washington in the meantime. But, anyway, we, uh, we walked up Pennsylvania Avenue. I was holding my mother's hand on one side and my sister the other. And following this man going at four o'clock in the morning. So, we arrived at the place where my father was living. He was boarding with some Italians. Which was located at the foot of the Peace Monument at that time. DANE: Where is that, the Peace Monument? SULLIVAN: Peace Monument. At the foot of the Capitol. And, uh, that was quite a, uh, so we went in and woke the people up and they were unusual to us. Because they knew my daddy had gone. He was, uh, boarding with them. They knew he had gone to New York. Anyway, they got up and they tried to fix up a little something for us. And we stayed there, and lived there that night until my dad came the following day. They got in touch with him and told him we were there. And he, he came there the following day. And we were there for a couple of days. These people had a lot of children. They were Italian also. Any-- (She clears her throat.) In the meantime, we went ahead. My father went ahead to look around for a place to live. Because we had to move, I mean, we had four children. So, he located a, an apartment over a jewelry store on Fourth and Half Street, right near Merlin Avenue. DANE: You know, I'm going to stop you before you get in to your life here in Washington, because I want you to tell me a little bit more about life in Italy. Before we get to far into this. SULLIVAN: Oh, yes. Oh, my life in Italy was beautiful. Uh, I use to go to school there. My mother would send me to school and, uh, in the first grade. And I had a teacher that if I ever was late, she had a, a needle at the edge of her sleeve. And she, used that needle and pinched my hands for being late. So, one day I was late, and I didn't want to go to school. It was about, uh, about 1903. And I decided to play truant. So, uh, anyway I was in a daze, because I wasn't going to school and I was afraid my mother wouldn't like a bit. But I kept watching a man painting a house. And as I did that, I fell over, over a big stone, which I didn't see. And cut under here and cut over here. Until somebody called my mother and told, told her to come and get me because I was bleeding all over. Uh, my childhood days in Italy, as a little girl, was very happy. DANE: And didn't your mother have some property and-- SULLIVAN: My mother had, my mother and father had a little vineyard. My father built a home. I've got the picture over here. Of, I want to show you. Of the house that my father built. Uh, (she clears her throat) it was a lovely home. And, uh, here, here, we had only, well, uh, I was the, uh, I was seven years of age. And, my sister was eight. Consequently, she was eight, I was seven, then six, then four. And, we, then she hah had two more children, but they died while my father came to America. Two boys. Well, any, (she clears her throat) my, uh childhood days in Italy are, as I say, I went to school, and, I made my first communion in the church there. DANE: In the vineyard, you were telling me that, you can remember your mother would work the vineyard when father was in America. And hired helpers to come do the harvesting. SULLIVAN: Oh, yes, yeah, when my father, when my father wrote and said to sell everything. So, in the morning she would have, uh, uh, grape pickers. She would get, or hire an oxen driven cart with, uh, she'd put us on it. And we'd take, take us to the little vineyard, which was just about two miles from where we lived. And they would go pick the grapes. They would pick the grapes and bring them back. And, uh, right in the, uh, I'll show you where, the, uh, front of the house. They, the men would take their shoes off and they would jump up and down and press the grapes. And we would have, uh, I mean, containers. To grab all the juice that was being, uh, pushed down. Then, the men would work for my mother all the time. But not only that but we had fig trees. And we would dry up the figs. And had everything like that. We had a lovely home. We had no business to, I mean we didn't have to move like some people did. My father just decided to come over here, and he in turn expected to return. But after staying here four years, and he had a little trouble with his brother. A misunderstanding. Consequently, he decided he wouldn't come back. In fact, he wouldn't even write to his, any of his brothers and sisters, when he came back, when he came back here. He, uh, said he would only take care of his mother and father until they died. And after they died he never took care of anybody, never wrote to anybody else anymore. So we didn't know anyone. When we-- DANE: And he had no desire to come back to Italy-- SULLIVAN: Never, no. Never. He intended to, but he decided to remain there and had my mother sell everything. And for us to come over here. DANE: You had told me also that, uh, your mother would feed you donkey's milk when she, donkey's milk? SULLIVAN: Oh, yeah, you see in Italy, when, uh, children have to be weaned. Which we had to be weaned. Uh, uh, the nearest thing to a mother's milk was a donkey. And so they bought one. We had a little stable, right underneath the house. And we had a big garden, uh, we had an entrance to the place, and then a big yard, and then steps going upstairs. Uh, my, they bought a donkey to take the place of mother's milk. Because we were only three years old. I mean, not three years old. (She laughs.) Three months old. My sister was three months, I was three months when my brother was coming, and so on. Well of course, you know, she got married when she was uh, uh, quite, around twenty seven. So she had uh, uh, quick family. One after the other. She had, uh, four, six all at once. You see. One year she had two children born. One was born in, uh, uh, in January of, and uh, that year, another boy was born in October, yeah. So, uh, consequently they served us, we, uh, had a little underneath. And, uh, we had a little house up above, that there was a little hole in the floor and my sister and I could always look down and see the animals there. And you know, at nights, when you're cold, over there. They used to have, uh, uh, a something called brazier that they put live coals on it and you would keep your feet around it to keep yourself warm. We, I remember that very distinctly. DANE: Something else you mentioned also were the vineyards, that you would have wine with breakfast sometimes. SULLIVAN: Oh, Lord yes. You know people ask me many times, "What did you have for breakfast?" And I said, "My goodness, my mother use to give us, uh, the homemade bread." Which she would make the, get the whole heal of the bread and dip it in wine, and give it to us. You know, in Italy, they have, uh, what they call continental breakfast. They don't have like fruit juice like we do here, cooked cereal. No, they have, we'll have a piece of bread, maybe, uh, and we enjoyed it. Whatever we got, we were satisfied. And if she didn't have wine, she would take a piece of bread and sort of dip it in a little bit of water and add olive oil to it. And we loved that, because, uh, their ways of living over there are a lot different than we, uh, found here. In fact, after we came here, we started fussing with my mother because we didn't want her to cook the way the Italians did. We wanted her to learn to cook the American way. And lots of people have said to me lately, "Why haven't you learned how to cook the Italian way?" And I often think how much we fussed with her. Because we didn't want her to cook our Italian foods. We sort of got ashamed of being Italian. Because we were harassed so much. After we got here. We didn't realize that things like that were going to happen. When we were in Italy, people would say, "Oh, your going to go to a wonderful country, you'll find money on the streets, and you wouldn't dare not pick it up because the American people would look down on you." And, of course, we found nothing like that. Not that we came here looking for money. But it was a, a shock to us, because we were, the minute we came, they recognized, with our clothes on, as you notice the picture. Our clothes weren't bad, it was shoes. Our shoes were hand made. They recognized this, and we, they used to call us, "Guinea," and "WOPS." Tear our clothes off our backs, and that went on for years. And, uh, when we first came here, no Catholic, I'm Catholic, no Catholic came near us. A beautiful Protestant woman, beautiful Protestant woman, who spoke beautiful Italian came to visit us. And we lived about, oh, uh, almost a couple miles from the Union Station. The regular Union Station. And she wanted, she asked us to go to church over there. And we'd walk up Merlin Avenue through the Botanical Gardens and way up Northeast to go to this church. We couldn't, couldn't, it was a Protestant church, we couldn't understand why the churches here were not as attractive at all, like they were in Italy. Because I made my first communion, my mother had been in a convent. But no one had come to us, no one came to us to say, "Now you shouldn't, you're not doing the right thing." Or something. Not a soul. Like they do today. They sort of take care of the immigrants a lot today. We were not, we had no one ever told us a thing. We had to just fight for ourselves. Learn everything the hard way, and we go so, that we were even ashamed of our nationality. But of course, since then, things have changed. DANE: When you were talking about food, that you would come home some days, what would your mother be baking? Pasta or lasagna or something? And you would say, what would you say? "We don't want to eat that kind of food?" SULLIVAN: That's right. We just would give her the devil, and she got so, she got so, she didn't even know how to cook anymore. In fact, if she cooked potatoes she wasn't even sure about cooking the potatoes. She got very mixed up here after she came here to America. My mother was a wonderful cook. And since then I've been remembering a lot of her cooking that she did when we were over there. And I find now, that the American people today are using the same kind of food that we were used to. Like beans and pasta and all these things that people are recommending now, as nutritious. And that is what we were raised on. All our lives. And, of course, when we came over here to America, my father, uh, instead of having about the same thing like, we cooked dandelions, and I noticed on TV last night they were talking about dandelions. My father would go out and buy cases and cases of beans. And, uh, peas, dried peas, and all that. And that would be our dinner for the year, for the winter. I mean, we never, we never had, uh, a change of food like they do here. We were given, even when we came here to America, my father continued, for us to continue to have the same kind of food that he was use to in Italy. DANE: But it was you kids that didn't want to be Italian. SULLIVAN: But we, but, well, we wouldn't let anybody know about it, afterwards, I mean later on. But at first, when we had company or friends would come to visit us we didn't want them to know that my mother was cooking that way. We just kind of, and lots of times I had dates with boys, I would say to them, "My mother, oh, my mother came from France." Right away they thought that she could talk French. She would, I would never tell them that she was an Italian. I used to tell my mother, "Get out of here, don't let anybody come and talk to you." (She laughs.) DANE: Somehow France was better than Italy. Coming from France was better than Italy. SULLIVAN: Well, people recognized French more than they recognized Italians at that time. Of course now, everything is changed. But in those days it was awfully, awfully, hard to overcome the fact that you were Italian. I don't know why. I think there was a misunderstanding about the country at that time. Well, of course, I think World War One changed all that because the boys went overseas and they learned different ways. But before that time, we, I, the minute the boy would know I was Italian, I was just, out. Now, I was kind of surprised when my husband, found, met me, and he loved Italians. And he liked Italians because he was Irish. And he learned, I suppose, in World War One, that the Italians and the Irish got along fine. DANE: And he's American born? SULLIVAN: And he was an American born, but his people were Irish. And they came from Ireland. DANE: You had told me that when you first, well I guess, two questions. Back in Italy, as a child, you had heard stories about money in the streets. But did you have any other image of what the countryside would look like, what people would be like. Did you imagine this? SULLIVAN: Oh, Lord no. No. We were, uh, the thing that impressed me when I first came from Italy is the arbors and the trees. In Italy, of course, there's no land there. Land is poor. They need more land. Consequently we never saw trees or bushes or anything like that. And that was what interested me. Not only that, but, uh, the first thing I noticed, the children on roller skates. I wanted those shoes. Anything that, uh, was different. I always loved it. Not only that, but when we went to school. My father had to take us out of school after we were in school about a year. Because the children harassed us so much. And we had to, uh, he took my sister and myself out of school for a long time. Soon as my mother came from Italy, she became pregnant with my oldest, one of my sisters, Rose. And then, later on she became pregnant with Theresa. Then afterwards she became pregnant with my brother Paul. Paul, who made all-America 1935. Anyway, uh, but we weren't allowed to go out and play unless we brought our brothers and sisters and took them outside with us. And it was a Palm Sunday, uh, one day, my sister and I were allowed, we were about eight or nine years of age at that time, because I was exactly, uh, I was seven, I mean, must, I was seven, I must have been about ten when these little children came along. And we had, we couldn't go out and play unless we could take our brothers and sisters with us. And a lot of them were wrapped up like little papooses, with that band around it. And it wasn't like being in a carriage. And it was awfully hard for us to carry them in our arms. But when this one Sunday, it was Palm Sunday and we, she and I, were out playing outside in front of the jewelry store. And, uh, I heard a church bell ring. And, uh, I said, uh, "Let's follow that church bell." And, uh, we walked and walked. And it was St. Dominicks at Sixth and C Streets, Southwest. And, uh, we went in. And there were a lot of children there and somebody got up and put a handkerchief on our head. In those days, they insisted that you had your head covered. Anyway-- DANE: And you didn't have a hat on. SULLIVAN: No, no, no. Well in Italy they don't. Anyway, so I, uh, uh, then after that we saw children walk out and we followed them in Sunday School. And then later on everybody kept asking us questions. Where we came from, we just, well, we were just a surprise to them. They had never seen or heard of us. And this was after three years in America. So, we, uh, after that, we kept going to our Catholic Sunday School, although against my father's wishes. He just didn't want us to go to a Catholic Church. They had a peculiar idea that the priests were not honorable. And the, Lord, I remember one night we got home after being in a service, he broke a broom on my sister's back. Beat her up, yeah. To keep us from going. But we fought him so much. Everything was, in our whole makeup we fought, our selves. Just fought to live, fight to win. That's what you had to do all the time. DANE: But he didn't mind you going with the Protestant woman. SULLIVAN: He didn't. He didn't because it was a Protestant woman. And there was no priest there. You understand. They had hallucinations that the priest sometimes became enamored with the young people. See. Anyway, but we fought, and of course, he never bothered us anymore. Once we kept going. We just insisted on going. DANE: And your mother didn't she, she'd been in a convent. SULLIVAN: Well, you know, uh, women in Italy, they have to cater to what the man wants. Never, she could never say, "Oh don't so that, or don't do that." She might have said it, but she never allowed us to hear it. Anyway, she, as I say, my mother was a very good woman. Very. DANE: So do you think your father, did it have anything to do with how he felt about the church even in Italy, or was this-- SULLIVAN: Well, he never went to church. All, the only time he went to church is when, was a baptism or a wedding. He never went. And, uh, even when he was dying, he never, never asked for a priest. But, when he was really sick and dying, he did ask for Catholic, for a priest to come and assist him. That was the only time I remember that he did. But he lived a good life. He was a wonderful, wonderful father and wonderful to us. Uh, he, never, never, uh, denied us anything we wanted. Uh, of course, there was not much money because my father was a stone mason. And, uh, he would go to work and the, uh, the, uh, general contractor would go in bankrupt, bankruptcy and then that meant, all, all down the line. When they would get to my father, he would, he wouldn't be bringing any money. And consequently, it was a pretty hardship. One time we didn't have five dollars to buy a ton of coal. And a ton of coal at that time was five dollars. I had to go to some, uh, uh, people that I had met in the church who I knew had some money, beg them to lend me five dollars. Which they did. And that's how hard things became for us. We lived in, uh, in houses without heat, no, uh, no rugs on the floor, bare floors. And just a latrobe in a bedroom. Which was a little heater in the bedroom. And only a pot belly stove in, in the living quarters. Uh, it was pretty tough. DANE: Now this sounded so different from your nice set up in Italy. SULLIVAN: Oh, yes, yes. We, you see, in our home there, we really had a lovely home, I want to show you the picture of our home. And, uh, I'm proud of it, I went back a couple of times to see it. In fact, I've located, oh, I went back in '55. I went back several times to locate the house I was born in. That is all that I've thought about, all my life. I wanted to go back to see my home, where I came from. And I finally did in '55. Uh, through some people I met here, they said, "Oh, uh, why don't you come to Italy, it's beautiful. Just beautiful." So I joined a, a tour. And, and when I got to Rome, I met an Italian, I was introduced to an Italian woman and asked her to come with me to my town. From Rome to Bari, section of Adriatic. And we flew over, paid her way over. And when I tried to locate my home I started crying because I couldn't locate it. And finally she said,this Italian woman said, "Give me the description. Give me the description of your house." And I designed it just the I remembered it. And told her where to go and when she met in Rome, when she, when I was back again. She said, "I found your house." And so, she had taken pictures of it and found my home. And it give me, I tell you, the first time I went over there, I knew I thought I could find it, just no trouble. But like everything, life changes, and everything changes. And I, I finally found it and I was so happy. When I, we tapped on the door. The woman answered the, out tapping. Uh, she, they take a siesta every day, and she said, the Italian woman, I heard her say, I understood her, "This lady is from America, and she said she lived here." So the woman got dressed and let us in. And I kept saying, "Oh I remember we had the beautiful chairs there, and the stove was here." I remembered all the different things about my, uh, my childhood days. And, also I remembered we had a place where my father, my mother had put some statues of the Blessed Mother and all, she had dressed them. And we would say our prayers every single night about six o'clock. Six o'clock my sister and I would kneel down and say our prayers. My father always saw to it that a drop of candy or something would drop from where those statues were. To make us believe that what we were doing and praying were gaining it, you see. I remembered that all distinctly, and I said, I said to her, "Well we have a, we had a beautiful fireplace and a beautiful canopy right over it." And she said, "Yes, yes, there it is." And she kept looking at me, and looking at me so funny. And she says, "I bought this house from a man who went to America." And I said, "What's his name?" She says, "Tangorra." And I said, "Well, that's my name." She was afraid I was coming back to take the house away from her. Uh, that was my experience when I went back in '55. DANE: So it must have been such a disappointment when you got to this country. And were in conditions that were-- SULLIVAN: Oh, Lord, you know. Imagine two little girls at nine and eleven years of age and twelve years of age. Scrubbing floors to keep the floors clean and right over that drug, over that jewelry store. The thing, the place was littered with bed bugs. You would squeeze the wood on the corner and you could see these bugs coming out. DANE: This is the end of side one, Cosma Sullivan, Interview Number 118. It's 1:50. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO DANE: This is tape one side two, Cosma Sullivan, Interview Number 118, it's 1:57. We were just talking about when the difference between you home in Italy, and how nice it was and comfortable compared to a place that had bed bugs in it, her in America which is supposed to be the "Land of Opportunity." Did you at that time, when you first got here wish you could go home? SULLIVAN: Never. Never. Because my father, my mother and father were here. My sisters and brothers were here. We just took, took this country, we took our schools finally we went to the schools and fought with them. I, when I was going to school, uh, I used to outspell all my boys, my boys in the class. I, I would, I just made up my mind that I was going to excel in everything. When I went to Sunday School, I've got to give you the story. After being in Sunday School for a while and then learning all the verse, the chapters and verses that the teachers taught, I was told to take an examination. And the first year I took an examination, oral and written. And I made ninety-eight percent. DANE: How did you learn to speak English, and read it? SULLIVAN: Oh, I learned to speak English. We learned, we picked it up right away. Well, when your a child you can pick up anything. Especially, when we were so willing to learn everything. And it didn't take as long to be able to talk English. DANE; Did your father speak English? SULLIVAN: No, my father spoke broken English. My mother never spoke good English. But we spoke, and we learned English and we went to school. I went to Jefferson School on, uh, on uh, Sixth Street Southwest. Uh, I got into all the things that the children got into. Like spelling bees and everything else. DANE: You told me a funny story about when you were first learning English and your father came home from work. SULLIVAN: Yeah. I said to him, the first thing I was, oh, that was the first day he came from New York. I said, "Oh, father I can speak English." One, two, three, four, five, six, seven , eight, nine, ten go to hell. That was the first words I said. But I, he told me then I shouldn't say that. That's the first day when he came from New York to see us. After we arrived. Those were the first words I learned. But it doesn't take you long to learn. Once you're a child, and once you're willing to learn and you, and you, pay attention, it takes no time to, uh, master the language. DANE: Would the younger children that you would play with in the street or at school, would they make fun of your accent, or-- SULLIVAN: No, we played. No, we played. We never allowed them, we, the only people that would, uh, call us guineas, people who didn't know us. Uh, as I say, we lived on, uh, in Southwest, and there were Italian families living next door. And, of course, they, they spoke good English. And, you, you begin to talk with people in English. You begin, begin to learn, and you kind of adopt their ways all the time. But, it's, it's. uh, when I hear people say that they take care of these immigrants, they do this. I can't understand why they have to do that. They, no one had to do that for us. We just picked right up and learned our way. We, uh, dock, we got into all kinds of things that, uh, athletics. My two brothers, younger than myself, George and Nick, they got jobs working for the Western Union. Delivering telegrams at night. And they, with the money that they made, they bought themselves a bicycle. Now, my father couldn't do it. my father was, couldn't afford it with all these children. He had seven children to support and my mother and father made nine. And with the little bit of money that would come in, I mean, they just couldn't help us at all. It meant we had to do it ourselves. And even in getting jobs. I remember I got a first, after graduating from Strand's Business College, I had some, these wealthy people, that loaned me the five dollars, sent me to school at their expense. They sent me to Strand's Business College to take a course in, uh, uh, shorthand, typing and bookkeeping. I had only gone to the eighth grade. No other high school or anything. And I went to Strand's Business College. Uh, after, after I, uh, got, I got through to nine months. I finished my course in nine months. I got a job at, at, uh, five dollars a week or twenty dollars a month. And, uh, I found out later on that, uh, I could get a better job with a little bit more money by competing. And I would, I was a very fast typist. All of us were. All my whole family. There was something in my family and my cousins. As I told you, one of my cousins was the world's champion typist. That, uh, we always could type fast and type accurately. So, I found out if I go in the evening after working all day long. And go to this place and try to win, I was told that the, the, most, the person who made, uh, the fastest and the most accurate would get it. And I got it after working for five weeks at night. But everything that we did in our lives, we competed. To better ourselves right along. That was our aim all through our childhood days. We had opportunities and we took them. And when I hear people say, uh, there's no opportunity, they're crazy. There's opportunities here all the time. And all they have to do is want to work. The trouble is a lot of them don't want to. DANE: Did you ever feel that you were competing as an Italian against people who had a better chance than you? SULLIVAN: Uh, I, the only, only time I ever felt, well I felt that way because after I competed and got this job with more money. There were three girls in there. And the man gave me, not only did I go to work for him, he wanted me to work, he gave me, uh, uh, time off to take some leave because I was working so hard. Gave me a raise. And after that I was fired. I was fired and I went to his home and found out why I was fired. I says, "You couldn't fire me because you gave me a raise, you gave me time off." "The girls didn't want you," he said. "I had to let you go because they threatened to quit on me if I kept you." That's the exact words he told me. And I couldn't get over it. That was a shock to me. DANE: And did they not want you because you were Italian? SULLIVAN: Did not want me because I was too aggressive. DANE: Too aggressive. SULLIVAN: Too aggressive. DANE: Do you think there was anything to do with you being Italian? SULLIVAN: No, no. The same thing happened when I was selling securities. The same identical thing happened to me. Uh, I tried to get back, I was working in the government. General Counsel's office of the Internal Revenue. As a, as a secretary. And, of course, I became pregnant with my son Dan, Jack and then Dan. And I wanted to get back. And this man, in the personnel office wouldn't take me back. All he offered me was a job, nine hundred dollars a year. Mind you, nine hundred dollars a year. And I was making good money, as I, before I became pregnant. But, anyway, I went back after my son was born. Uh, he was about three months old. And I asked for my job back, immediately, he wouldn't offer it to me. So, finally, I decided to, to start a stenographic office. And I went and got, uh, a rent from, uh, some real estate for an office and got three months rent free. Provided I pay the first month's rent. And, uh, after, uh, after a while and later after two years, we had a very successful all efficient stenographic service. That's what it was known as. Uh, my sister and I, uh, had it. I use to go from the top floor each, each office and say, "We have a core of secretaries downstairs. Very, uh, equipped to handle all kinds of work, would you please give us a chance." And sure enough, we'd get a chance and un those days we only got two dollars a hour. Now you get a lot more. But anyway, after that, a man came to me and said, uh, he took, he gave me a letter. And after I took it he said, "How would you like to work for me in a stock market office?" And I said, "Oh, my goodness, I've always wanted to do that." And I had visions that it was very fascinating to work in a stock market. I had no idea what it was. I didn't know what a com, uh, a common stock or bond or preferred stock was, nothing. Just meant nothing to me. But, anyway, I finally got the job and every year the company would give me a pink slip showing me how much money I made. I use to go to the personnel office of the, of the, uh, Internal Revenue, and show him, uh, Mr. Tracy, this is what I made this year. I'm so glad you didn't take me back in my job at nine hundred dollars a year. And I did that three solid years to that man. And it did me a lot of good to show that I could do it without him taking me in, wouldn't give me a job. I don't what it was. DANE: What do you think-- SULLIVAN: I think it was a personality clash. I, uh, absolutely believe it was. DANE: So you came to this country, and it really was a "Land of Opportunity." SULLIVAN: As far, as far as we were concerned, yes. Of course we always say, say to my brothers in Champaign, "We don't realize how lucky we are. If we'd stayed over there we don't know what would have happened." Some how I feel we're lucky we came. Even though we had to fight hard. But I don't regret the fight that I had to put up all my life. And it was a fight. And these wealthy people, the Williamson's, they used to own a lumber yard, how, how they came to like me, I don't know. But, uh, I think I met them in the church. And as a result of that, they probably saw that we needed help. And they paid my tuition at school, even gave me music lessons because their daughter had gone away to become a nun during World War One. She was going to be cloistered. And that was one place where the Germans were going, uh, take those sisters and, uh, she died before she went back. But she, on her death bed she told her mother to give me music lessons. And I don't know, I think God was good, good to us in many, many ways. Because he opened up something for us. And we took it. We never once said, "I'm sick and tired." I used to have two jobs. Two jobs. I used to work on Saturdays Han, Can's department store. Dollar, dollar and half a day. Then I'd come home at night and work in the local dry goods store for fifty cents. That, that was two dollars a day that I made. Was enough for me to help me buy a pair of shoes. DANE: Did your father encourage you or did he help you in the beginning? SULLIVAN: No one. No one. No, we just, we just, uh, did it ourselves. Now my brother, Paul, he's a college student. He got it by playing football. And, uh, he's the only one that had college education of all of us. Now some of them had high school. I never had, all I had was eighth grade. DANE: Did your father ever take you out of school, or-- SULLIVAN: No, at first he did. The first year, when we were in school, because we were harassed and beaten up and all like that. Finally he decided to leave us alone and take us out. And, and he kept us home for one year. But then we went back and I, after we went back to school, I went through each grade, a half a year. Skipped from one, the second to the third. Skipped right along. Because I mastered the classes as I went along. DANE: Did your father and mother want you to go out with Italian friends? Or did they want you to-- SULLIVAN: No, they never associated with any Italian people. We never met Italian people. That, consequently, all the people we met were Irish, mostly. In fact my sister married a, a Lynch, my other sister married a Farrell, I married a Sullivan and another, and another sister married a, let me see, oh, uh, Fisch. By the name of Fisch. DANE; Do you think that was on purpose? SULLIVAN; No, my father wouldn't associate with any Italians on account of a, uh, misunderstanding he had with his brother in Italy. He, he promised not to write to his brother and sisters, he never did write to his brother and sisters. DANE: And didn't want anything to do with Italians? SULLIVAN: Didn't want anything to do with it except, except he took care, he says, "I'm going to take care of my mother and father. And when their gone that's it, no more." And he, he lived to it. In fact he had a brother living, uh, in, uh, uh, New Jersey. No, wasn't New Jersey. He had a brother lives, living in America here. And he wrote to him and begged him to make peace. And he wouldn't do it. Because his brother was one of them that, uh, was against him in, along with a brother in Italy. They had a misunderstanding in Italy about, it was a question of money. And, uh, I think money is a curse sometimes. It causes an awful lot of ill feelings. (She clears her throat.) But, uh, as a result of that, in fact, when he was dying, I called his brother up and told him to come and see his, see his brother. He would never see him again. Which he did, he came over and saw him. But he couldn't speak to him. My father was ill, had been ill for five, six years. And he did, the last job he did was remove that wall, MacLaine Wall. On Wisconsin Avenue. That, all that stone work on Wisconsin Avenue was, uh, work that my father did in 1920. That was the last piece of work he's ever done as a stone mason. And then after that he was ill for about five, six years. DANE: Let me take you back to Italy a little bit because I think you probably have a few more memories back there. One thing that this picture pointed out in your house. Your father was a stone mason and built this house for your mom. Tell me the story about these initials that are over the door, that leads into the house. SULLIVAN: Yeah, when an Italian builds a home for his wife, they always put the wife's initials on it. And it was, uh, her name was Maria Rafaella D'Amore. DANE; How do you spell D'Amore? SULLIVAN: D-'-A-M-O-R-E. D'Amore. That was her last name. And, uh, uh, those initials, I mean that's what I have always told my sons about this house. How, how we loved it and the initials goes to show you they're in there right up on top. That's the home. DANE; 1897. SULLIVAN: 1897. That's the year it was built. 1897. DANE: When you came over on the boat, you had such a great memory. And you were talking about you did things with the captain and things. Was the trip over an adventure for you as a young child? SULLIVAN: Uh, it was a, it was a ter-, we were eighteen days on the water. It was a, as far as children are concerned, we enjoyed it. As far as chil-, except we had one bad night. Very bad. But other than that we had a, uh, as children, we had, we had a lovely time. We really enjoyed ourselves no matter where we went. (She clears her throat.) When we were in Italy my mother would take us always to watch, uh, the trains coming in. Or on Sunday mornings she would always take us to breakfast, uh, she'd take us someplace and before she'd take us in she'd give us each a spoonful of cod liver oil before we'd go in, take some. (She laughs.) But my mother was very good to us. She took wonderful care of us. DANE: You said you had a horrible night. One of the nights on the eighteen days you were on the ship. SULLIVAN: Oh, well it was, uh, it was a very rough night. The water, the boat, looked like the boat was just going to sink. It went from one side to the other and brought the water in and people were screaming and yelling and screaming. That's the only bad, uh, bad part of the whole trip. That I remember distinctly. It was kind of scary and being down in the steerage you got all the water and you got everything, see? And I remember, uh, I remember it very, very well. Because it, I could, I still hear people screaming and children screaming, scared to death. It was really scary. That was the only bad, uh, bad trip we had on that water. Other than that, it was a pleasant trip. DANE: Did you think you might die that night? SULLIVAN: Never, no. You know, death doesn't, you know, when I, children never think of those things. I think it's just grown up, children are happy people. And they don't get scared, I don't think. We never did. We were just happy children. DANE: Did you play games on the boat when you were-- SULLIVAN: We, we, uh, we went from one, uh jumped around from one place to another. Kept it up all the time. And they loved my brother. I had a beautiful brother as you notice in the group. This, this brother of mine was the best looking child, everybody loved him. My mother always was scared to death that somebody would steal him. But he was an unusual child, of course, this boy was alright. But this boy was unusual. DANE: Would he go up into second class and meet people up there? SULLIVAN: Oh, he would be up, on the, right there, in that, I think he's the one that interested the captain. The fact that he was so good looking and so vivacious. We were all, all of us children were more or less full of life and vivacious all the time. We, somehow or another I just can't realize that children today grow up and are bored. I just can't, never get bored. Uh, I found happiness, no matter where we went. DANE: Would you meet other children on the board or-- SULLIVAN: These were the, no, I don't remember meeting any more children on the boat. Other than I do remember the captain had us at his table quite often. And my mother was quite surprised, she couldn't get over it, but we accepted it. DANE: As far as new foods and new sights that you'd never seen before in Italy, coming to this country, do you remember anything in particular that you'd never seen before, bananas, people said, or oranges? SULLIVAN: Well, I, I think all that comes to you eventually. Uh, you begin to learn all about this new food. Uh, we didn't have bananas in Italy. But I think we had, uh, my mother had very good food. As I say, she was in a monastery, I mean, and knew how to cook, she had a wonderful way of cooking. Whatever she'd fix, she'd always fixed us broccoli with pasta and olive oil and I remember that distinctly. And I remember she used to make a big, in fact I have one of these pies plates this big, that I gave to my son that my mother had in the convent. And it's like, uh, a pizza. Like a pizza pie. And she'd make a huge pie. And she'd make a huge big, uh, sort of pizza. Stuffed with cheese and onions and everything else. Just what people want today. But, uh, we had all that and we, we enjoyed our food over there. Of course, afterwards, after we got here and learned an awful lot, we began to realize that what we had in Italy was better than what they're serving here. See, now, I, I was the, with this, uh, Mr. Sullivan, they had their ways, Irish potatoes and things like that. Which my family never gave a darn about it. We always loved our pasta, oh, our mixture, uh, as I say, lots of time broccoli and this chick peas we used to mix together was delicious. And, uh, lots of this stuff is coming back to me now, at my age. I often say, "Well my mother used to cook such and such a thing." My mother, now the other day I came across a recipe for pasta and, uh, broccoli mixed. And I thought, my goodness my mother used to have the same thing, you see. DANE: Something else, I wanted to get in all these standard questions. Uh, when you came to New York harbor, do you remember seeing the Statue of Liberty? SULLIVAN: Oh, yes, before, before we landed, we saw the Statue of Liberty while we were on the boat. And everybody just screamed and yelled and we just, oh we thought that was the most wonderful thing on earth. You know, uh, when, uh, I found out that, uh, they were going to revive the Statue of Liberty, I thought that was the most wonderful place to work anybody could do. And I turned around and gave them a hundred. And I turned around and gave another hundred for my other son. And I'm going to give them another hundred for my other son. Because I than God for the opportunities that I had and the things I have done to better myself. I have bettered myself no matter where I have gone. I became a successful, uh, business woman in selling securities. I won a trip across the United States, all my expenses paid. I became a secretary to a judge, a federal judge here. Which is, and then I was able to take a trip to Italy, which was the greatest thing that could ever happen to me. To go back and find the home where, that, that is one dream I had and I use to say to my husband, "If I don't go back, I'll hound you from the grave." And, (she laughs) he never wanted to go with me, I wanted him to go with me, but I made up my mind that is one thing I had to do is go back and find that house. That house meant a lot to me as a child. DANE: Do you think then it sounds like, do you consider yourself more an American with Italian roots or half and half? SULLIVAN: I am, I am a, I am an American to the nth degree. I would fight for this country any day. And I think it's a shame that people don't fight more for it. But we've got a wonderful country here. We have everything, we've got lots. When you see people kneeling down, they'll kneel down and kiss this ground. Because they don't realize what we have here in this country. We have opportunities here galore, always. And if you really want to take it, it's there for you, if you want to work. The trouble is that people don't want to work and they get all this hand-outs by the government for nothing. And that's what's, it's ruining the country. They ought to stop it, completely. DANE: And as far as your Italianness goes, how does that work into the equation of being an American from Italy? SULLIVAN: Well, you have a feeling that you like your old country. But you still have adopted this country. This country has made, has given me the opportunities which the other country never did. I never gave it an opportunity and I don't believe I would have had it. Not as good as I've had it here. DANE: Especially as a woman. Do you think your life would have been different as a woman in Italy? SULLIVAN: Well, uh, from what I know, uh, uh, of course, today, everything is different over there. But from what I know, the opportunities here were much greater than over there, at the time. When you stop and think, a lot of them didn't have any way of, uh, making any money, of self supporting. The, uh, only thing they could do is be seamstresses or, uh, not even teachers. I always wanted to become a teacher when I was a young girl. If I could have afforded to go to school, I loved to have been a teacher. To teach other children. I, my brother, I had a brother that could draw a turkey on the wall, no lessons of any kind, you'd swear that turkey was ready to jump off the wall. All, all my brothers, I've got a nep-, I mean a grandson, he's done that painting there and no, no lessons of any kind. My son is an architect. That's what he wanted and it's just in him. I think it's the Italian that is in him that comes out. And he's got a son whose a great architect. Right there, there he is. DANE: That's amazing. Can you hold for a second O.J.? We're almost near the end here and a standard question also is about your name, when you arrived in this country. Your maiden name was Tangorra. Could you spell the whole thing, when you came? SULLIVAN: T-A-N-G-O-R-R-A. But we got sick and tired of saying double "r", in fact, uh, we eliminated one "r", but, uh, our cousin in Italy told us we never should because there is a, a Tangorra with one "r" which doesn't belong to us. That the double "r" is our family. Uh, I don't know why we did it, we, I, I tell you, like everything else, we, uh, kept going, we kept going, we thought we were doing the right thing. That is to say, no one talked to us, no one gave us, uh, any encouragement, we just had to accept everything which we thought was the right thing to do. And, uh, I think we've done pretty good, all of us have just very successfully done everything. Now my son Jack has nine children. My other son Dan has seven children. So that's sixteen grandchildren. And I'm, I keep in touch with all of them. I had a little girl, Kathleen, that died at birth. In fact I had, uh, three girls born, and they all died at birth. So, I'm very unfortunate not to be able to have at least a little daughter which means an awful lot to me. DANE: Tell me with the double "r" in dropping the "r", did it make you, or your father feel more American by doing that? SULLIVAN: No, no just for spelling. We just thought it was a lot easier instead of saying double, R-A, R. Just, just to ease. Because, uh, lots of times, my name I was always ashamed of my name Cosma. I just couldn't understand people would always say, "Where did you get that name?" And I was so ashamed to tell people. So lots of time I put "C". I put the letter "C", and then people would say, "What does "C" Stand for?" And I'd say, "Catherine". See, I'd never say it was Cosma. I never wanted to say it, it was a name after my other grandmother on my mother's side. The grandmother on my mother's side. I have her picture too. Uh, her name was Cosma, and, uh, uh, and as a rule, when children are born in Italy, the first boy's named after the father's father. And the girl is named after the father's mother. And then the same, next one goes with the mother. They always follow that old style. So I was named, I was the second daughter named after my mother's, uh, mother's name, Cosma. And, oh, I always, always hated it. I always didn't want it. And it's just recently that I just gone ahead and use it. DANE: When you hated it as a child, was it because it was different from everyone else's? SULLIVAN: Yes. Yes. Oh, I, everybody would say to me, "Where did you get that name. Well I never heard that name." And then you would have to start explaining. Which, uh, as children you don't like to explain much. So the easiest way out, that we could say, we, we did it. DANE: Any final thoughts in the last minute of our tapes that you would like to share? SULLIVAN: There's a lot to say, there's a lot that comes back to me. A lot of it. Uh, I think, (she laughs) after you leave I'll be get-, probably be saying to myself, "I wish I had such-a-such-a-thing." But you know, you can't remember everything in, uh, in a, uh, small time. If you just can go ahead and talk without thinking that you are limited for time, you can say a lot more. But, uh, my trip to America I don't regret. Even though it was a hardship. As I told my son today, I never regret it. In fact I'll tell you one thing. When I working for a lawyer, I was getting seventy dollars a month. That's when World War One broke out. Anyway, the people were changing and moving away and I had my sisters, my young sisters and my brother growing up. They were ten years younger than myself. And at that time the boys were coming, colored boys were coming, going into the, uh, homes of women. I didn't want them to see the same thing. And I wanted to move. So I found out that, uh, uh, there would be, houses being built up on Fourteenth Street extended. And had a friend of mine who had just bought a house, her mother had just bought the house there. And, McGilicut, and she, I said, uh, she said, "Oh Cosma you ought to move up where we are moving." And she said, "There's only one house there, but I think it's sold and if it's not sold I'll let you know." So, she came back and she said, "The house you can have, it's for sale. The people can't get the money." So I, uh, wanted to know how much money I should have. I wasn't twenty-one. And, uh, she said, "If you can get some money." So I borrowed three hundred dollars from my boss. I was only making seventy dollars a week, a month. Anyway, I got three hundred dollars from him, and I put that as a deposit on the house. Fifty seven fifty was the price of the house. 4502 15th Street, N.W. And we bought the house. And of course my father and mother didn't want to move at that time because we're all living in Southwest. But, uh, after they found out that we bought it, then they decided to move. And they couldn't put the house in my name because I was a minor, so they put it in my mother's name. So that's how I bought the first house, uh, in the city of Washington. Fifty seven fifty paid for it. At the time it went up to eighteen thousand. I wasn't twenty-one. DANE: This is the end of tape one side two, Cosma Sullivan, Interview Number 118. It's 2:35.