MR. BULGARUS: All day.

LEVINE: All day and I’m here in Concord, New Hampshire with Mr. and Mrs. Bulgarus. Mrs. Bulgarus was born [Roseanne Cristadolo].

BULGARUS: [Cristadolo].

LEVINE: Cristadolo and she came from Greece in 1926 when she was two years of age. Today is November 1st, 1995 and this is Janet Levine for the National Parks Service. Well I know you have an interesting story even though you were very young at the time but I’m sure there’s a lot of interesting things there. So let me start in the beginning. Where in Greece were you born?

BULGARUS: [Castana] [Cardizes] it’s a small village.

LEVINE: Um when you say Castan…

BULGARUS: Castana.

MR. BULGARUS: Castana.

LEVINE: Castana, and what’s the other part? 

BULGARUS: [Cardizes].

LEVINE: Card…

BULGARUS: Cardizes.

MR. BULGARUS: Cardizes. 

LEVINE: Cardizes, which is the same larger area as where your husband was when he was in Greece? 

BULGARUS: Oh well I think it was…well no it was a larger area. 

LEVINE: Now did you come from an area that was anywhere near in Greece? 

BULGARUS: Most there [laughs].

LEVINE: Yeah, uh huh. 
BULGARUS: Yeah but little did he know that one day he’s going to marry the wife that was just born when he was nine years old [laughs]. 

MR. BULGARUS: I thought she was a rebel. 

LEVINE: A rebel?

BULGARUS: In West Virginia, yes. 

LEVINE: Yeah. Wow okay well so you probably don’t remember life in Greece because you were so young. 

BULGARUS: No. 

LEVINE: Do you remember anything? 

BULGARUS: It’s a very strange thing. I do remember things that happened to me in the village I call it [Unintelligible: 0:01:49] in Greek. Its …there were…I don’t know…they didn’t have the well you know restrooms and like that… you had to go outside no matter what time off day or night it was. And I was always afraid because the village was up high, very high on a hill almost. And although I was small—so young—I was frightened because of the heavy wind and everything and I would just go and hide under my mother’s skirt [laughs]. I remember that and well just a few things—not too many things though. But I was very interested when we were leaving to go—my parents told me this—but after they told me, I do remember. You see we were going towards Athens so that we could leave to come to America and every time I’d see a statue I would think of Jesus Christ because my uncle—[corrects] my grandfather had bought the property right next…about right next to the little house that we had there—my parents—and so my grandfather bought the property and they had a church built there and when it was built and everything I remember Jesus and you know the church was so beautiful. And I’d say my prayers all the time you know every time I’d see one. So when we arrived in Athens and I saw the statues there, my dad and my mom had…you know were laughing they got such a big kick out of it, and I started to say my prayers [laughs]. [Mr. Bulgarus speaks unintelligibly in background at 0:03:43] I remember that. I remember that and I also remember when we were on the ship, faintly though I could see a lot of people [Mr. Bulgarus: and the [dolphins]] and they had the ship you know it makes that sound you know when you get on and its ready to leave. My father was carrying me for a little while and then he put me down and he was holding me, holding me by the hand and I don’t know…he told me that I just took my hand away from his just for a second, and this guy that he was talking to on the ship, distracted him to the point where you know I left my father and there I was by myself running all over the ship there, and it was the time when they were anchoring the…you know for people that were ready to come on the ship, and my mother and father were petrified they thought oh god. She must have…‘oh no she fell in the ocean’ or whatever. But the truth is and this is the funny part, I always loved music so being so…such a young, little girl you know I was surprised I could hear the sound of music and it was earlier in the morning where people hadn’t gone into the dining room yet, and [laughs] my father was you know said, ‘oh I lost my little girl. She has black hair, curly black hair and we have to find her!’ So everyone on the ship was looking for me and here I am sitting at this [laughs] …sitting at this huge table all alone, just sitting like that, listening to the music. And my parents told me about it [laughs] and I couldn’t…I was laughing and I said well that goes to prove I really love—and I still do to this day a lot of music and dancing and everything but it was funny how you know…

LEVINE: Do you know if you came over on a Greek ship? Was it Greek music do you think? 

BULGARUS: It was Greek music. You’re right but even though…it could have been the Olympia

LEVINE: Uh huh.

BULGARUS: …the Olympia. I wish I could remember that—the name of the ship at that time. 

LEVINE: Now I don’t think you said your birthdate for the tape too.  

BULGARUS: My birthdate—August the 3rd, 1924.

LEVINE: And let’s see did you ever celebrate name days?

BULGARUS: Yes my mother had a name day and my father… no he didn’t have a name day—just my mother. Her name was [Unintelligible: 0:06:41].

LEVINE: And then what was her maiden name, your mother?

BULGARUS: Lazarides.

LEVINE: Can you spell that? 

BULGARUS: Lazarides…oh well I can’t say it in English. Lazarides. L-A-Z-A-R-I-D-E-S. Lazarides. 

LEVINE: And so you…when you came to this country you came with your mother? 

BULGARUS: My mother, my father, and no my sister was born in America…

LEVINE: I see so you were…

BULGARUS: …in West Virginia 

LEVINE: …an only child at that time. 

BULGARUS: Yes. 

LEVINE: Yeah. Now do you remember anything at all about the New York harbor, the Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island?  

BULGARUS: I saw the Statue of Liberty but I just thought it was…saying my prayers again…[laughs]. My father…I’m glad you reminded me with that. Well that’s about it and then in West Virginia. 

LEVINE: So why did your family go to West Virginia? 

BULGARUS: Because my father first he came…he went to West Virginia when he was sixteen years old because his oldest brother had already left to go to West Virginia because the coal mines and they were making a lot of money and my uncle who was older than my dad—about maybe four years older—and he wrote a letter saying I want you to come over. I need help and that way we can help our parents too. They were five…oh no five children and his father and mother, seven in all so they were very poor. And so they…my father said okay I’ll come and help you and he was only sixteen. But in 1921 he…the war was going on with the Turks and the Greeks. You know it seems like that was forever and ever all the time. So my father said I’m going to go over to Greece and fight for my country. So he did. He went to Greece and that’s how he met my mother. She was…I don’t know how far away from my father’s village. I don’t think it was that far away, maybe a half an hour away or something. So he met my mother and she was the youngest of ten children that her parents had. And I lost my grandfather when he was real young but my grandmother died a hundred and two years old. God bless her, yeah, and my mother just recently, well five years now…she passed away at ninety-six and a half years old. They came from a strong, healthy family; it was just my grandfather who passed away so young.  But there were five girls and five boys. She lost…my grandmother lost one…one son so that left her nine after that. And…but they…over there at that time when you have a big family too, they didn’t think that the girl should have to have a lot of education because well…you get married, you have children. In fact my mother said well where do you want to go? Well I said I thought I didn’t listen. I said, I need to go have some kind of education. But the sons had to have their education…doctors and they would be either a doctor or lawyer, engineer—a thing like that. That’s the kind of education they have over there that’s why they have so many lawyers all of them you know from each family. But anyway she came from a big family. 

LEVINE: What was your father’s name? 

BULGARUS: Alcibiades, which means Al in short. My youngest son, we named him after my father. My husband…my oldest son—you saw the picture—and he was named after my father-in-law. The first child they name them…this is a lot different. I mean people they don’t understand…

LEVINE: This is kind of a Greek tradition…

BULGARUS: Yes. 

LEVINE: …of naming?

BULGARUS: Yes and not only that. Here if you say in America, you want to name the child after the grandfather or the father, you see over there we don’t have junior and senior. They want you to have the name from the grandfather first from the…well from his side of the family first, and then if I have another son after my father. So over there they say oh that’s like my husband has his father’s middle name, Constantine. So when they hear Socrates Constantine Bulgarus, they say oh I know, that’s his father Constantine. 

LEVINE: Uh huh.

BULGARUS: You see instead of saying senior or junior. 

LEVINE: And it doesn’t matter if the father is…the grandfather of the child is alive or not? 

BULGARUS: No. 

LEVINE: That doesn’t matter its just…

BULGARUS: No. Just that’s the tradition is that…

LEVINE: How about girls, are there any traditions about naming girls? 

BULGARUS: Well its kind of hard because how could I saw Roseanne Alcibiades—its my father’s name you know. But you could say yes that’s why its Rose and then Anne—consider like Al—which isn’t the same thing. But my daughter has my name, the middle name: Frederica Roseanne Bulgarus. 

MR. BULGARUS: That’s a good German name.

BULGARUS: See yeah at that time Queen Federico was very high you know in reigning like…in 1954 when our daughter was born, his godfather said I know what I’m going to name her and I’m not going to say anything its going to be…its going to be like a…like a queen, a queen thing and so he named her Federica. 

LEVINE: Well now is it the grandfather’s uh godfather’s role to name the child? 

BULGARUS: Yes they’re supposed to name the child. 

LEVINE: But do the parents get to…

BULGARUS: Well if they…if they…well my…his godfather didn’t want to [Recording skips at 0:13:31]. See his godfather baptized his name was [Unintelligible: 0:13:41] okay and there’s a family here—the [Unintelligible 0:13:45] family and but they’re dead now—the godmother and godfather—so we didn’t say anything, we left them you know…but he was my husband’s godfather, he was his sister’s godfather, and he was the godfather of my oldest son, the godfather of my daughter, but the youngest one was named after the…his godfather has passed away now from Mattapan. Yeah they were from Mattapan at the time. Now they live in Dorchester after that. They didn’t have any children so they named them after my father because they knew my father better than his parents, and they said, ‘oh we’ll name this one Alcibiades.’

LEVINE: Uh huh. So it was a surprise to you when the names were chosen?

BULGARUS: Well I expected it because that… I know the tradition you know. That’s why. 

LEVINE: I mean like Frederica. 

BULGARUS: Well when he said queen, I hesitated a while but then I says…well…yeah he said Federica and I liked the name. Yeah, it’s different. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Are there any other Greek traditions that you know people who came to this country continued to carry on? 

BULGARUS: Yes no matter…no matter what. Now that…this is the difference between marriage of today and I mean then and marriage of today. You get married and of course you have a family and everything and I was raised like that—that the husband is a king like you know and what he says you should obey and everything—well I didn’t agree with that because I was a little older after that. I mean of course respect and all that but it should be mutual: fifty-fifty I don’t believe in seventy-five and fifty you know, no. So its tough but I remember because my father was just like an angel. He was so good to my mom. They…I never grew up in a household where I heard them even argue at all. It was so beautiful. They were very close and we loved each other and I…that’s what I wanted. That’s what I was looking for. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm. Well when you…when your father took the family to West Virginia…

BULGARUS: Uh huh. 

LEVINE: …was he working in the coalmines again? 

BULGARUS: No, no. My father didn’t ever work in the coal mines. The reason I mentioned the coalmines, it was the richest coal mine in town in West Virginia. 

LEVINE: Oh. 

BULGARUS: … and the miners that worked in these…in these awful coalmines like that …my father had two and his brother of course [Recording skips at 0:16:57]. They had two restaurants. We happened to be living up on a hill at that time in a big, big house. But as they decided why not have two restaurants, one for the miners, the you know they allowed gambling, horse racing pickets you know things like that. There was nothing strict about their laws about anything like that and you, if you go to West Virginia, see these beautiful high mountains...if you go up to Laconia. I would go through that area myself and say, ‘oh god this reminds me so much of West Virginia.’ The greenery and all that—I remember that—all of it and it was so beautiful [recording skips at 0:17:55] especially because he came to America when he was sixteen and he said, he didn’t know a word of English like my husband—but his brother had a chance to go into the World War I you know so he went to school—that’s another reason he wanted my father. So he could have him work and while he went to school to learn the English language and probably had a little college education too…although my father had to work hard so he could to help his family in Greece, help to marry off his sisters because they were poor over there. They needed a dowry. 

LEVINE: What would the dowry consist of? 

BULGARUS: Money mostly, if you have something that…if you’re going to be living in the village, he’ll say, ‘oh I’ll give you that horse or cow or whatever’ [laughs]. [Mr. Bulgarus speaks unintelligibly in background at 0:19:00] so I just anything that…I never liked that. I never, never liked because my father never asked anything for my mother. She was poor too but he loved her so that was the most important and so when I get married. If any guy comes here and asks for me because they want a dowry, out they go! So he didn’t ask either [laughs] otherwise you would have been out of my life [laughs]. 

MR. BULGARUS: Suppose I had taken over your estate. 

BULGARUS: I didn’t have any estate. What estate did I have? You mean my father’s estate?

MR. BULGARUS: Of course [my] grandfather’s.

BULGARUS: Listen never mind. You didn’t ask for it and you weren’t going to get it anyway [laughs]. 

MR. BULGARUS: I can save for it. 

LEVINE: So okay let’s see, you were saying that you were in West Virginia and your father was helping… 

BULGARUS: His brother and in the meantime he’d send money to his sisters to marry them off, and everything. You know that was a hard time for the old people.  

LEVINE: Excuse me in West Virginia was there a large Greek community? 

BULGARUS: No, five families that’s all. When my father…or when…oh this was interesting my father used to say to me, when he had to come to America—he was sixteen years old, he didn’t like I said live in Greece—and when they all had to when they were traveling, they didn’t know how to speak so they put a tag on them. You know they put a tag on them [Recording skips at 0:20:53] you on each of the guys that went to West Virginia or wherever they were going. 

LEVINE: You mean they put that on?

BULGARUS: With their name on it—yeah just like stamping an animal or something, and where the direction that they were going to go and that was it. That was it and West Virginia at that time was more like these cowboy movies you see the desert like, and that you can see the mountains where they used to have Indians. And when I would go to the movies, where on one side of the street, it was Pocahontas; they named the theater Pocahontas. On the other side across the street, temple, so it was really mostly an Indian reservation at the time and cowboys and everything. So it was tough for my dad because he said they’d come into the restaurant and at that time before they built two newer restaurants. They were coming in to have a drink and some would take the gun out and slam it on the counter. You know my father was petrified. He couldn’t say too much you know and not only that we had a few colored people down there but they were very nice. And they had a tough time but my father no matter what color they were, he felt sorry for them you know. They…‘Al could you give me a job, I need to…I need.’ So my father because the law was they would not be allowed to go in the restaurants at all. If you want…if they want to go and have anything to drink or whatever, they’d have to go in the back of the kitchen. So my father felt bad you know but that was the law—otherwise he would have been in trouble. But he was nice to them. They all liked him, I remember that, and they were always good to us too when I was growing up and going to the high school. They had their section—the colored people—and they had their own restaurants, they [wore their homes] and everything but the only difficulty was for me to go to my school, which was a grade school, they had it all up on the hill, the grade school, the high school and the gymnasium right in the middle—right there somewhere. But the thing was the colored people would…would have to go…to go up to the high school would have to go a little ways into where the colored section was. They didn’t harm us or anything but it’s the way they would stare at you and everything. You would go it was a kind of frightening but I knew they weren’t going to bother me because they knew my father too and everything. But that was interesting and you weren’t allowed…if you go…went on a bus, the colored had to sit in the back. They had their own section for the colored people. I remember that because it…

LEVINE: [Recording skips: 0:24:28] were they discriminated against in any way? 

BULGARUS: No not at all. Not at all no. Because they all felt sorry for the colored people too you know and it seemed that they all took to you like that. They’d say, ‘hello, how are you?’ and so yeah. 

LEVINE: Did the town remind you or your mother and father of the village in Greece at all? 

BULGARUS: Oh yes…a little bit, not that…well because it was a small city but as I was growing up it became larger and larger—well not that larger—ten thousand population. They had beautiful stores I mean and it was a boomtown. It was really something else especially when all the people had to go into the service and I graduated in 1942. And so I remember 1941, they were enlisting them you know the minute they graduated. And I’ll never forget his name—John [Landberry]—he died the minute he went to the service; they killed him, you know with the war that was going on and I cried and cried not because I mean…we wasn’t…we weren’t close but he was in my school, my grade, high school together. And we lost so many young people too at the time. And I then I used to say to my dad, I said dad, ‘do they don’t know that girls too are enlisting—[whack and wave]—and I wanted too [Mr. Bulgarus speaks unintelligibly in background: 0:26:20]—really that’s a thing we should do to help but at that time they were thinking that the women were thought of as trash you know, [Recording skips: 0:26:37] and my father says no, I didn’t think of it in that way, but he did. And then I said well maybe he’s right, you know, and I didn’t try. But I did graduate and then I went to a business college and then when I…while I was still studying, and it was about two weeks before graduation, my teacher said to me, ‘you know Roseanne, they have two job openings for you and I told them. They asked me who was the best one here you know…who is the smartest girl that you have there?’ and I was good with my bookkeeping and shorthand and secretarial work and all that and they…she mentioned my name. So she said go to the bank first and then go to the Appalachian…like the Power Company, that was one of the biggest…you ever hear of the Appalachian Mountains?

LEVINE: Mm-hmm. 
 
BULGARUS: Well its all the way up, up to hear you know. 

LEVINE: Its called Appalachian?

BULGARUS: Uh huh, Appalachian Electric Power Company. 

LEVINE: Electric Power Company. 

BULGARUS: So I worked there for three years because they were paying more money instead and I just went and had an interview at the bank. They weren’t paying us much, and I didn’t say anything. I said I’ll think about it. So then I went to the Electric Power Company—they were paying more money so I stayed there for three years. 1941 Mr… [Mr. Bulgarus interrupts in background speaks unintelligibly: 0:28:19].

BULGARUS: Oh we…[laughs].

MR. BULGARUS: When we met…

BULGARUS: Oh we [laughs] met when I was in the junior high.

MR. BULGARUS: Oh yeah. 

LEVINE: How did you meet when you were in junior high?

BULGARUS: I was coming home from school with my books under my arms. 

MR. BULGARUS: Those anklets yes you know. 

LEVINE: Anklet socks? 

BULGARUS: Yeah and butter…I mean Buster Brown shoes brown and white, and here he is across the street in his uniform [laughs]. And he was talking to his uncle but his uncle had an interest in me and he was old enough to be my father, and…

LEVINE: [Interrupts] Oh his uncle was…?

BULGARUS: His uncle. His uncle, yeah! His uncle…that’s how he…he came to visit his uncle and that’s how we met.

MR. BULGARUS: He liked the young…[speaks unintelligible in background at 0:29:13]

BULGARUS: The tender ones [laughs] I know and I thought I always called him uncle because my parents taught me to older people to say uncle and aunt, although they weren’t.

MR. BULGARUS: Right. 

LEVINE: You called people uncle and aunt?

BULGARUS: Uncle and aunt, yeah. When we were young. [Recording skips at 0:29:31] So he was so funny. He knew the [son] was going to down to see him and he didn’t want anybody to meet me. He was very funny [laughs].

LEVINE: He wanted you to himself? 

MR. BULGARUS: He wanted to say this is mine and that’s mine too! And his too! 

BULGARUS: He was something else. He never was married. He never did marry either. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

BULGARUS: Anyway, you should have seen his face when he saw Soc and I were going to get married [laughs].

LEVINE: So when you met for the first time…

BULGARUS: [Interrupts] Yeah I…

LEVINE: …what did he do? You just saw each other? 

BULGARUS: No I was across the street. I wasn’t paying much attention but at first but then I says, ‘who’s that handsome guy with his you know with his uncle of course?’ I knew his uncle but and Soc was just for a few days he had to leave to go into the service again. He was going to go across so that’s how we met. We went dancing one night, that one night before he left, and it was nice but…no I don’t want to say anymore. I didn’t know whether you know… I thought he was a little short, and this and that but I said no that’s okay, that’s okay. I said that’s all right.

MR. BULGARUS: Yeah but the old Greeks they used to have different names for…what was it there? The Olympics…

BULGARUS: Yeah oh yeah okay. 

MR. BULGARUS: Anybody was this guy, his name was [Pithiokampus] and he used to give them, at commencement they used to give him a group of people—like five or ten boys for him, and if they didn’t fit the length of that bench, they would…or another guy would have to saw them and saw the legs! [laughs].

BULGARUS: So I wanted to stay when I started working at the Appalachian one and he came down in 1941. Yeah I said that before. That was before he left…no it was when you came out of the service. What am I saying? Yeah he was…I’m sorry I forgot now. 

LEVINE: Did you correspond at all? 

BULGARUS: He wrote me. 

MR. BULGARUS: Corresponding [Mr. Bulgarus speaks unintelligibly at 0:32:04]

BULGARUS: No, no, no [laughs] Soc, come on no you know what it was when I was working in the office, he was right, and I never answered him. I…it wasn’t because I didn’t want to. I had his address in my address book.

MR. BULGARUS: Yeah she didn’t want too but...

BULGARUS: I don’t know why I just didn’t answer him. My dad said, ‘what’s the matter with you? He writes all this time.’ I said, ‘I will, I will, I will.’ But it was [laughs] a time when I was working.

MR. BULGARUS: You were very, very busy. 

BULGARUS: No we had…we had Bob there. 

MR. BULGARUS: Oh yeah. 

BULGARUS: He was always…he said ‘you know what we have to do?’ He said ‘we have to get these girls together, have their pictures taken and everything and send it across’ send their pictures and let them know that the girls in West Virginia really are thinking of them and wishing them well, you know. So one day…oh this thing it was so funny.  Here I am at the office and they had put the address where I was working. Thank God they didn’t send it to the house right away, and I received this big package, and the girls said, ‘my God Rose who went from…’ [Mr. Bulgarus speaks unintelligibly: 0:33:41]. So this guy was in the service I never knew him from Adam you know but he saw my picture and he chose me to write to. And the other girls of course, they had certain guys that preferred them you know what I mean. But I didn’t expect anything you know. Then I opened up the package and the girls got a kick out of it because he sent me a grass skirt. I still have it my trunk [laughs]. 

MR. BULGAURS: You should have saved it in a…you should have saved.

BULGARUS: Soc, please the lady wants to get it over with [laughs]. A grass skirt and letters of course and pictures and I have all that, but it’s a good…you know… 

LEVINE: Yeah, yeah. 

BULGARUS: …I like to keep them just to…not in person because I cut it off… he came down and I liked what I saw, again he didn’t have his uniform on. He looked good in his uniform of course. And this…

MR. BULGARUS: Oh yeah. 

BULGARUS: And this…

MR. BULGARUS: [Speaks unintelligibly: 34:54].

BULGARUS: [Speaks to Mr. Bulgarus] Who? [laughs].

MR. BULGARUS: The other guy. 

LEVINE: No its…so when he came back you came again to see your uncle? 

BULGARUS: He came this time to see me and his uncle warned me. You know what he said to my husband? He said—we weren’t married of course—but he said he knew now that Soc was going to come down, the minute he came out of the service—so he says to my husband…[Mr. Bulgarus speaks unintelligibly: 0:35:24]. Yeah he wanted to marry me okay and I disappointed him to the point where I said, ‘you’re old enough to be my father.’ I didn’t mean to hurt his feelings because I knew he was really, really bad and I felt sorry for him. He was nice looking but he was old, old. 

MR. BULGARUS: That’s why he didn’t want to [Unintelligible: 0:35:49].

BULGARUS: Anyway…

LEVINE: So what did he say to Socrates? 

BULGARUS: Oh no before…yeah Socrates told him that he was going to come down to see me and before [laughs] before...[laughs] so before Soc came down, he comes up to me and he says, ‘I want you to give me an honest answer’—in Greek of course he was talking to me—he says, ‘so do you want Socrates to come down? He wants to come and see you.’ I says, ‘well if he’s going to come down of course.’ He said, ‘are you in love with him?’ I says ‘how do I know if I’m in love with him I never went out with him or anything?’ And he says, ‘I want to know now so I can tell him not to come, not to come.’ 

MR. BULGARUS: He wanted a guarantee. 

BULGARUS: So I says, no leave the man alone and he left. Yep. 

LEVINE: So did he warn you against seeing her [Speaking to Mr. Bulgarus]?

BULGARUS: Yeah.

MR. BULGARUS: Well she was waiting her on…

BULGARUS: Yeah but he didn’t dare say anything to Soc because Soc already had caught on right away you know. 

MR. BULGARUS: You know what I used to tell him? I’ll go and buy you a gun to blow up your…

BULGARUS: Soc was mad. He was very upset—well being his uncle you know. You’d think…

MR. BULGARUS: Yeah, two generals in the army, Greek army, and they were working with the king in Greece, a count, and these two [Unintelligible: 0:37:30 ] they were old enough and they both were in love with the young chick—the daughter of the general…

BULGARUS: It was different in those days.

MR. BULGARUS: Oh yeah.

BULGARUS: I don’t know these older men that thought that well I can get anybody I want but not from me, not from me. 

LEVINE: Yeah. So when you met then, did you stay…did your husband stay in West Virginia? 

BULGARUS: No, no. He was just out of the service, you know. We decided what my…you know to go out…I mean what my…when we were going to get married that was September 15th, 1946.

LEVINE: And so did you get married there in West Virginia?

BULGARUS: Yes that…

LEVINE: Yeah.

MR. BULGARUS: And the funny thing was, it wasn’t a Greek church either.

LEVINE: Oh.

MR. BULGARUS: No. 

BULGARUS: No…they well, you know what it was in Welch—that’s a Welch, West Virginia, where I grew up—where the high school is and on the other side of the hill, going down the hill and then another hill going up, you know I found so fascinating because the church that this…the [Unintelligible: 0:38:53] church they called it—the little red church…the little red church on the mountain. In other words, like many a time you say ‘oh that’s good luck to get married in little red church, you know.’ I don’t know if you heard any of that described like that but that’s the way it was. 

LEVINE: Oh.

MR. BULGARUS: Way they had it in Tennessee.

LEVINE: Oh uh huh. 

BULGARUS: So that’s where we were married, although it wasn’t a Greek church, but we had to have a Greek priest come from Roanoke, Virginia. 

MR. BULGARUS: Oh yeah and you used to wear no shoes. 

BULGARUS: Oh no I wore shoes. I wasn’t up in the mountains…

MR. BULGARIS: The priest.

BULGARUS: Oh, oh forget him.

LEVINE: The priest—he didn’t wear shoes?

BULGARUS: No, no, no. Stop 

MR. BULGARUS: One time when he was seventy, and they stole his shoes… 

LEVINE: Well did you do any Greek traditional things about the wedding? 

BULGARUS: The wedding is all traditional Greek all the way—Greek orthodox. 

LEVINE: So did you…did you remain religious in the Greek Orthodox Church? 

BULGARUS: Yes, yes, yes and of course I hated to leave Welch because I was raised there and I knew a lot of people and I didn’t know how things would be here. But I was just like a stranger you know and I was looking to find what I had down there. And people here were kind of rude too. I had a real southern accent, which I’ve lost after all those years. But I got along better with the men up here than the women I would say, really. Because I found them to be…they’re not like that now. They know me better and they know I don’t take any bull, but I’m good too. I can be real good. [Mr. Bulgarus speaks unintelligibly in background: 0:40:58]. Down there you know people are so innocent-like you know and the southerners are just different people. I’m not saying they’re all like that no. But I mean they’re very hospitable. He knows, he served in the south. He knows. [Mr. Bulgarus laughs in background].

LEVINE: And when you came up here there was like a probably a larger Greek community than it was?

BULGARUS: It was, definitely, yeah, oh yeah. Yeah we had good times. There wasn’t a dance we didn’t miss. We went everywhere and then of course he wanted children right away. I didn’t right away because I was only twenty-one—just turned twenty-one, and my husband wanted children right away because he was turning thirty-one. No I was turning twenty-two. What am I saying? Anyway so a month after I’m pregnant…

MR. BULGARUS: Poor soul [laughs]. 

BULGARUS: He wanted to keep me pregnant I think, barefooted [laughs]. No I’m just kidding. So we lived in this house with his parents. It was a terrible experience for me.

MR. BULGARUS: Oh.

BULGARUS: But anyway, he knows all about it. So finally…that’s…that’s about it. 

LEVINE: So now why don’t you say the names of your children also?

BULGARUS: Right. 

LEVINE: …for the tape. 

BULGARUS: My oldest son is Constantine—was—god bless his soul he passed away. It will be nine years November the 10th that he passed away and in fact we’re going to have his nine year memorial this Sunday—yeah he…the oldest son Constantine…then my daughter Frederica Bulgarus and Alcibiades Bulgarus.

LEVINE: How do you spell this…

BULGARUS: A-L-C-I-B-I-A-D-E-S. Alcibiades. He happened to be…see in Greece it’s a very popular name. Because he…they had a write-up about Alcibiades the General. So when he went to high school [Mr. Bulgarus speaks unintelligibly: 0:43:17]…see he liked …he loves his name. They call him Al for short and he was little I’d call Alci, Alci, instead of Alcibiades. But people love our name. It isn’t very common here in America. But if you read the history book like Al told me when he was in high school, they were studying the history of language and they came across the name, Alcibiades. So he was perking up a bit because they used to kid him about that name. He said, ‘no that’s mine.’ He’s so cute.  

LEVINE: Yeah, yeah. 

BULGARUS: Yeah.

MR. BULGARUS: But she never mentioned my name. 

BULGARUS: Who?

MR. BULGARUS: Who? My grandfather.

BULGARUS: Soc we’re talking about my children now…and my little…my other little child, Socrates [laughs].

LEVINE: So how is this time in your life when your children are grown and you…

BULGARUS: [Interrupts] Well if we hadn’t lost our Charlie...our life just…I mean you know I’m grateful that we have the other two, but there’s something that’s missing in our life and it bothers me. 

LEVINE: Yeah, that’s hard, very hard hard…How about the fact that you came here as a two year old child and you left Greece and really lived your whole life here? Do you think that made a difference on who you are—the fact that you came from another place, and started a new life when you were young? 

BULGARUS: No I don’t think I would have changed anything because you see when you grow up believing in the values your mother and father taught you and you like…well I’m not sorry about that. I am Greek American. I’m more American than Greek. But I did have to have a citizenship papers every time I went to Canada I had to get… [laughs]

MR. BULGARUS: [Interrupts] But you can stop being American citizen too.

BULGARUS: No way. 

MR. BULGARUS: Oh yes. 

BULGARUS: No way. 

LEVINE: Would you…would you have dual citizenship? In other words, could you have citizenship…

MR. BULGARUS: No.

BULGARUS: No. I don’t think so. Now look at the difference. I was born in Greece and raised in America. My sister was born in America and she lives in Greece [laughs].

MR. BULGARUS: Where in the hell was I?

BULGARUS: So I have one sister. We don’t see each other hardly… 1984 we went to Greece. We stayed there three months with my husband. We went to Vienna, we went everywhere you know; it was so wonderful because that was the first time we had actually had a chance to have really like a second honeymoon. And then my brother-in-law after he passed away, and my poor sister she lost him when he was only fifty-six years old and he was sixty-nine. So there was an age difference there. But he was a wonderful doctor and I miss Nick a lot. And then little did we know two years after that we’d lose our son. So that’s killing me. 

LEVINE: Well what do you think of the idea of a melting pot? I mean from your perspective—you know that idea that America is a great melting pot? 

MR. BULGARUS: Used to be.

BULGARUS: Soc, please. For me I’m very thrilled and happy to be an American. I am more American than Greek I think and I wouldn’t give this country up for no other country in the world. We have our problems but when I hear, see what goes on in other countries over there… I love Greece but I would never want to live there, no way. America is my country. 

LEVINE: Okay is there anything else that you can think of that we maybe haven’t covered? 

BULGARUS: Well I kept you so long now. I’m trying… 

LEVINE: No this is most interesting. No I’m glad. 

BULGARUS: So that’s the story of my life so far and I hope that…[laughs].

MR. BULGARUS: Suppose you were in Belgium fighting the Second World War? What would happen? 

BULGARUS: Soc, I’m not going to answer that. 

MR. BULGARUS: Ohhhh…

LEVINE: [laughs] Okay well I think…

MR. BULGARUS: Let the dogs get you. 

LEVINE: Okay well I want to say this is very, very interesting interview…

BULGARUS: Yes thank you so much. 

LEVINE: …and I thank you so much. It was a pleasure to have both. 

BULGARUS: I appreciate you coming over. 

MR. BULGARUS: So you’re going to go to New York with those? 

LEVINE: Yes, I’m going to bring these back to New York and then put them in the Ellis Island …

BULGARUS: That would be great. 

LEVINE: …library and send you a copy of the tapes. 

BULGARUS: That would be great. 

MR. BULGARUS: And also do…

BULGARUS: Do you want us to…

MR. BULGARUS: Can you make a small little card from the…

LEVINE: Ellis Island.

MR. BULGARUS: Ellis Island and say you’ll read the name and say ‘what the hell I know her.’

BULGARUS: Oh my daughter sent me an Ellis…

LEVINE: Okay wait you still want to…

BULGARUS: Oh I’m sorry. Oh okay.  

LEVINE: I’ve been speaking with Roseanne Bulgarus and its November 1st, 1995 and this is Janet Levine for the National Parks Service and I’m signing off. 


