SIGRIST: Good morning. This is Paul Sigrist for the National Park Service. Today is Friday, March 15, 1991. We're here at Ellis Island with Albert Donner, who came from Poland in 1936 when he was ten and was detained here at Ellis Island for two weeks. Good morning. DONNER: Good morning. SIGRIST: Mr. Donner, could you please give us your full name and your date of birth. DONNER: Albert Donner. I was born July 16, 1926. SIGRIST: And where were you born? DONNER: I was born in a little town called Bystra, B-Y-S-T-R-A, Poland. SIGRIST: Where in Poland is that, roughly? DONNER: That's not too far from the Czech, Czechoslovakian border. It's about an hour by car from Krakow, near Novisange, which is a summer resort. And right, almost at the foot of the Tatra Mountains. SIGRIST: I see. Tatra? DONNER: Tatra. T-A-T-R-A. SIGRIST: I see. Can you describe the town a little bit? Was it a big town? DONNER: It was a very rural, tiny town. I went back there about five years ago, and I couldn't find it on the map. It was near a town called Gorlice, which was also a tiny town, but that I found on the map, and I was able, then, to locate Bystra. Just a small farming community. SIGRIST: I see. Any industry in the town? DONNER: None at all. SIGRIST: I see. Let's talk about your parents. We'll start off with your parents. What was your father's name? DONNER: My father's name was Leibush. SIGRIST: Can you spell that, please? DONNER: L-E-I-B-U-S-H. SIGRIST: I see. And what did he do for a living? DONNER: My father was a farmer, a dairy farmer in Bystra. SIGRIST: And did you keep cows, that sort of thing? DONNER: We had cows, we had horses, and primarily dairy cows. He supplied some milk and dairy products to the town of Gorlice. He was a very poor farmer who rested a grudging existence from the soil, mainly. SIGRIST: I see. What was your mother's name? DONNER: Gittel. Uh, she was much younger than my father. It was my father's second wife. SIGRIST: Could you describe the farm a little bit? Just, what was the actual layout of the property? DONNER: As you entered the front door, to the left was the barn. The house and, no, the front entry door to the house. The farm and the house were attached. So as you entered to the left was the barn. The cows and the horses were there. To the right was a kitchen with two bedrooms. The kitchen had a very large stove where my mother did the baking. SIGRIST: What was it made out of? DONNER: I don't recall. The house had a dirt floor. There was no electricity, no running water, no indoor plumbing. We got our water from the well. There were outhouses outdoors. And when I went back there five years ago, the only thing that changed was that one line of electricity was brought in, and somebody had put linoleum over the dirt floor. Like time stood still. SIGRIST: What was the house made out of? DONNER: Wood. SIGRIST: And this was all one story? DONNER: One level. SIGRIST: And can you describe the barn a little bit? Was it just a big open space, or were there stalls? DONNER: There were stalls, yeah. There were stalls in the barn. It was a good-size barn. It wasn't as large as I remembered it. I guess being ten it looked much larger to me in those days. SIGRIST: Right. Let's talk about the rest of your family. Could you list your brothers and sisters for us, please. DONNER: I had a brother that came to this country to escape the draft in the First World War. He was a half brother, same father, different mothers. He came here and established a clothing business in this country. SIGRIST: What was his name? DONNER: His name was Morris, Morris Donner. I had another half-brother in Poland who had a store in Gorlice, which was the adjacent town. I had three sisters. Two of them were married, married after I left Poland. While I was in Poland my three sisters also lived on the farm with me. So there was my mother and father and three sisters on the farm, a brother, who was married with two children in Gorlice. SIGRIST: Let's talk a little bit about religious life. What religion were you? DONNER: We were Jewish. My father was very orthodox. In those days he wouldn't think of working on the Sabbath. He walked Saturday mornings for what in the Jewish religion is a minion to my grandfather's house, which was several miles up a steep hill. And my father, in those days, was in his sixties, not a well man. But he was very, very orthodox. SIGRIST: What other, shall I say, what other things associated with that do you remember as a child? For instance, what, if you couldn't work on the Sabbath, what did you do? DONNER: Just stayed around the house, went to services at my grandfather's house. SIGRIST: The services were held at his house. DONNER: At his house. SIGRIST: There was no synagogue. DONNER: There was no synagogue. Just enough men got together to form what they call a Jewish minion, ten men, and the services would be at my grandfather's house every Saturday. SIGRIST: Was this your father's parents? DONNER: My father's father. SIGRIST: Your father's father. And did you have a lot of interaction with your grandparents? DONNER: Yes, yes. Both my grandfathers were alive, and one grandmother was alive. SIGRIST: Which grandmother? DONNER: My mother's mother. And my mother had seven brothers and sisters who were alive. Some of them lived in the adjacent town, others lived in Krakow, which was not that far away. SIGRIST: Would you say that your entire extended family was very close? Did you all spend a lot of time together? DONNER: Yes, yes. It was very close. SIGRIST: Could you describe, perhaps, a holiday celebration of some sort for us? For instance, Passover. Where did you go for Passover? DONNER: Passover was generally in our house. And the family was there, my father would conduct the seder, and there was a lot of singing and a lot of religiosity that was involved in it. SIGRIST: I see. Who did the cooking? DONNER: My mother. SIGRIST: I see. Was she a good cook? DONNER: I think so. I don't really recall, but I think so. I remember her even baking bread every Friday in time for the weekend. SIGRIST: Did you ever help her do that? DONNER: Yes, I did. SIGRIST: What kind of bread? DONNER: Black bread. SIGRIST: What was the process? What sorts of things did you have to do to make black bread? DONNER: I really don't recall. SIGRIST: But you do remember . . . DONNER: But I do remember helping her and making it. SIGRIST: Did she bake it in the oven? DONNER: She baked it in the oven, yes. SIGRIST: I see. You said there was no synagogue. What about going to school? DONNER: I went to public school. And in the winter roads were impassable because the school was a distance away and the snows in that part of the world much harsher than they are here, so in the winter I used to stay in Gorlice with a rabbi. I boarded and stayed there, and I went to religious school there and to public school in Gorlice. SIGRIST: Were there other children who were boarding with this rabbi? DONNER: Yes. SIGRIST: So it was sort of like a private school in a way. DONNER: That's correct. And yet I went to public school. SIGRIST: This brings me to the point of if your father was infirm, was not well, who ran the dairy farm? Did you . . . DONNER: He did, and there was some hired help. SIGRIST: Did they live with you? DONNER: Yes, they did. SIGRIST: Could you talk about them a little bit? Who were they? DONNER: I remember, the only ones that I remember were a woman and her young daughter. I don't associate her with a male. And I know that she helped. And there were others because I remember being in the fields and planting potatoes. And there were other workers, but I just can't associate a face. SIGRIST: How many acres did your father have? How much property was there? DONNER: I really don't recall exactly but it was a lot in terms of acreage. Someone once got in touch with me after the war from Canada who was related to someone who worked on the farm who wanted to buy the property and there were, he quoted that there were a certain amount of, I forget the term he used, hexameters, or whatever. And I know it was a very large field. What exactly happened to it, how it got carved out, up, I really don't know. SIGRIST: Now, you grew vegetables and well as kept cattle. DONNER: Yes, we grew vegetables, potatoes, hay. SIGRIST: Was this mostly for your own consumption, or did you sell the vegetables? DONNER: No, we didn't sell the vegetables. This was for our consumption. The only thing that was sold were dairy products. SIGRIST: I see. Um, did your father, your father owned this property. He didn't rent this property. DONNER: No, he owned it. SIGRIST: Was this family property that was handed down, do you know? DONNER: Uh, it was, yes. It belonged to my grandfather and then it went to my father. SIGRIST: So your grandfather had been a dairy farmer also? DONNER: No, he wasn't a dairy farmer. I don't know what he did, but he was not a dairy farmer. He owned the property, but he wasn't a dairy farmer. SIGRIST: You kept, obviously, animals for the dairy farm. Did you keep any pets? DONNER: No, no. SIGRIST: All right. Let's talk a little bit about why you came to America. Who decided that this should happen? What was the process? DONNER: My brother's intention was to bring the entire family over. SIGRIST: This was the brother that was here. DONNER: That was here, uh-huh. Morris. He wanted to bring us all over. And I remember, in those days, of course, it was very, very difficult to bring people over, and I remember the discussions as to who was going to be the first to go. My mother wanted my sister to be the first, and my father insisted that I be the first. Of course, being the male in that type of culture he had the final say. And I was the youngest and I was the first to start the immigration. SIGRIST: I see. So your brother had been in constant contact with your father. DONNER: Always. And as a result I came here. I think the thinking at that time was that it was '36. While the war hadn't started yet, there were rumblings. War was on the horizon, and I was a male. And there was also a tremendous amount of anti- Semitism in Poland at the time. SIGRIST: Were you witness to any anti-Semitism in your town? DONNER: Yes. I was witness to a lot of it in school. SIGRIST: What sorts of things? DONNER: Well, don't forget, I had, I stayed with the rabbi in Gorlice. And some of the kids that were there wore, in those days, the pais, the round things around their ear, and they wore the tzitzis. And the non-Jews in school would beat them up. They would cut off their payess. They would call them jidexs, and we were always harassed in public school. SIGRIST: I see. So being from an orthodox home you were dressed . . . DONNER: I didn't, no. I wasn't, no. SIGRIST: But you did see other kids. DONNER: But I did see other kids, right. And even though I wasn't dressed the same way, I was victim to the same thing, you know. Verbal abuse. Physical abuse. SIGRIST: Were you ever witness to any large-scale anti-Semitic protests or any of that sort of thing? DONNER: No, but my grandfather was beaten up constantly by gangs that attacked him for no other reason except that he was a Jew. SIGRIST: I see. When your father wanted you to be the one to go, did that cause a great deal of dissention in the household? Was your mother very upset by that? DONNER: She was upset, but she accepted it. In those days you accepted the final decision of the male, who was head of the household. SIGRIST: How did this all go about happening? How did you, did your brother send money? DONNER: Uh, my brother didn't send money, but he made the necessary arrangements. And I left the farm with my mother. We stopped at Krakow. SIGRIST: What did you pack? Do you remember what you took with you? DONNER: I had a very small suitcase with, I think it was a change of clothing. I remember a beret that I had because I came here and I wore it for quite a while. I had a prayer book and I had my, that's about it. Just a change of clothing. And I left with my mother and we visited her brother who was, who had a grocery store in Krakow. SIGRIST: How did you get to Krakow? DONNER: By train. SIGRIST: There was a train stop in the town that you came from? DONNER: Well, from Gorlice, my father took us to Gorlice, and then from Gorlice we boarded a train to Krakow. SIGRIST: And how did your father get you to Gorlice? DONNER: Horse and buggy. That's how he delivered the dairy products, and that's how we travelled. SIGRIST: Oh, he delivered door to door. DONNER: No. He pulled up in a wagon in the town of Gorlice and people came to the wagon and he filled their containers with milk and that type of thing. SIGRIST: I see. All right, so you got on the train in Krakow. DONNER: So I got on the train. We visited my uncle in Krakow, and from Krakow we went to Warsaw. SIGRIST: Was that a long train ride? DONNER: By train. No, a few hours. And then to Gdynia. SIGRIST: I'm sorry? DONNER: Gdynia, the Port of Gdynia. SIGRIST: Could you spell that, please? DONNER: G-D-Y-N-I-A. And I sailed from Gdynia on the S.S. Batory. SIGRIST: Now, was your mother still with you when . . . DONNER: My mother was with me, and she said goodbye to me in Gdynia, and I boarded the ship. SIGRIST: Did you have to stay there for a period of time before the ship left? DONNER: No, because I remember waving to her from the ship. SIGRIST: I see. So she stayed with your right . . . DONNER: She stayed with me till the end. SIGRIST: Was this, how did you feel as a ten-year-old child, suddenly being alone, leaving your mother and getting on this big ship? DONNER: I think I was excited. I don't think I was afraid. I think I just felt excitement coming to a new country. SIGRIST: Was there any person who was acting as your chaperon? DONNER: Nope. SIGRIST: And did any other people from your town also go on this voyage? DONNER: No. SIGRIST: So you were very much alone. DONNER: I was alone. I was alone, and . . . SIGRIST: The name of the boat was . . . DONNER: M.S. Batory. B-A-T-O-R-Y. It was a Polish ship, and I remember I had two cabin mates. One was a young man who was coming here to join an American wife. He had, he was a Polish man. He married an American citizen and he was coming here, being the husband of an American citizen. And then there was an older man coming here. I don't know what his reason was, whether he was just immigrating. SIGRIST: Also a Pole. DONNER: Also a Pole. And I remember the trip took about ten days. SIGRIST: What was the cabin like? DONNER: I don't recall the cabin. The only thing I recall is that I had an upper berth, an upper bunk. And I remember being terribly, terribly seasick. SIGRIST: It was a rough trip. DONNER: I don't know if the trip was rough or I was just sensitive, but I remember being terribly seasick. And I remember a very wonderful nurse who, the ship's nurse who tended to my needs. SIGRIST: Do you remember, how did she help you with your seasickness? DONNER: I think she gave me medication, and she was very attentive. I remember her very fondly. SIGRIST: Did you have to go to her, or . . . DONNER: No, she came to me. SIGRIST: Were there lots of people who were sick? DONNER: I don't recall. And I remember seeing, as I was crossing, whales spouting water up. SIGRIST: So you did come up on deck? DONNER: Yeah, I did come up on deck. Because I also remember playing shuffleboard. But I don't remember if it was in the early part of the voyage, or if I got sick and recovered. I just remember being terribly sick. SIGRIST: The gentleman that you shared the cabin with, did they sort of look out for you? DONNER: Yes. Yes, they were very paternalistic towards me. SIGRIST: So you said that the voyage took about ten days? DONNER: Right. SIGRIST: Do you remember what you ate on the boat? DONNER: No, no. SIGRIST: You were probably sick all that time. ( they laugh ) And didn't eat much of anything. Well, all right. Let's get you to New York Harbor. Do you remember coming into New York Harbor? DONNER: I remember coming in and I remember that I wound up on Ellis Island because my papers weren't in order. SIGRIST: Do you remember seeing the Statue of Liberty? DONNER: Nope. And I remember coming into a very large room on Ellis Island, and the thing that sticks out in my mind is that while I was spending the two weeks here I was fascinated. I remember watching men play checkers. There were checker games that were going on here constantly. I don't recall in what part of the building, but there were checker games because I remember men playing checkers, and I remember my first glimpse at a black man. I'd never seen a black man before. SIGRIST: Sure. DONNER: And I remember being fascinated. SIGRIST: Were you frightened, were you just interested? DONNER: Fascinated. I found it fascinating. And I remember even for months after I came to this country I found watching blacks fascinating. SIGRIST: Did, do you remember who that first person was? Was he an employee? Was he one of the detainees? DONNER: I don't recall. I don't recall. I would think it was an employee. SIGRIST: I see. What was wrong with your papers? DONNER: I don't know. SIGRIST: Where did you sleep at Ellis? Where were . . . DONNER: I don't recall. SIGRIST: Was it very crowded? Were there lots of . . . DONNER: Yes, I remember it as being crowded, yes. SIGRIST: I see. Again, how did you feel as a ten-year-old being alone and having to stay at a place like this? DONNER: I don't have any sense of feeling any fear. I just assumed that everything would work out. I was curious to see my brother. I had never met him before. I didn't know what he looked like, you know. I was curious to meet him and see what America would be like. SIGRIST: Did he come to Ellis right when you first got here? When you first arrived, was he here to meet you, or did they, because I assume . . . DONNER: No. SIGRIST: He wasn't. DONNER: No. I remember somehow seeing him while I was here, but it's as if I saw him from a distance, not, you know, with a separation. I don't recall what the separation was. SIGRIST: So you really didn't get to even talk to him until after . . . DONNER: No. Until after he got me out. SIGRIST: I see. Do you remember where you ate here at Ellis? DONNER: I remember it was a large community type of eating, but I don't recall the food or the exact place. SIGRIST: Were you ever allowed to go outside? DONNER: No, no. I was indoors. SIGRIST: You stayed inside. Did you have any interaction with the medical staff at all? DONNER: I remember being examined. SIGRIST: What did they do? DONNER: They examined my eyes, they examined my heart, you know, with the stethoscope, and that's about it. SIGRIST: But you were a healthy child. DONNER: Yeah. I was healthy. SIGRIST: Well, how did you finally get off Ellis Island? Do you know what your brother did? DONNER: I guess the papers were straightened out, and my brother got me off and took me home to Passaic. SIGRIST: I see. Do you remember seeing your brother for the very first time? DONNER: I remember seeing him. SIGRIST: What was that like for you? DONNER: I don't think I have any particular feelings toward him. He was more or less a stranger to me and I remember, you know, at some later date we discussed the things that we conversed about when we first met. I asked him how business was, what he did, you know. He was virtually a stranger to me. SIGRIST: His name was . . . DONNER: Morris. SIGRIST: Right. And what was his business? DONNER: He was in the clothing business, and he was older than I was. Let's see, Morris was ( he pauses ) about 28 years my senior. SIGRIST: I see. Do you remember how you got to Passaic? DONNER: Uh, yes. He didn't own a car, but he hired someone to drive for him and we got to Passaic by car. SIGRIST: I see. As a child, did you have any expectations of what America was going to be like? I mean, did you suspect . . . DONNER: None at all. SIGRIST: You really just didn't know. DONNER: None at all. SIGRIST: I see. Can you describe where Morris lived? DONNER: Morris lived on Madison Avenue in Passaic which was a second-rate street in an apartment building which was poor. It was a walk-up apartment. He lived on the third floor. SIGRIST: Did he have a big family? DONNER: Just he and his wife. She couldn't have any children. But she was a very, very lovely woman who died shortly after I came to this country. SIGRIST: What did she die of? DONNER: Nephritis. She had kidney failure. SIGRIST: I see. Did you have your own bedroom in their apartment? DONNER: Yes, I had my own bedroom. SIGRIST: And let's talk a little bit about going to school. Did you enroll in school very quickly? DONNER: Yes. Right across from that apartment was No. 6 school in Passaic, which was an old dilapidated structure, and I was put into kindergarten. I didn't know how to speak English. I only spoke Polish and Yiddish. SIGRIST: How about Morris? He probably spoke English. DONNER: Morris spoke English with a heavy accent. SIGRIST: Was his wife American? DONNER: His wife was an American-born, and she worked with me for hours. We would work for hours every day. She would try to teach me English. SIGRIST: How did she go about doing that? Do you remember? DONNER: Well, I would say, "ket" and she would say, "cat". I would say, "ked" and she would say, "cat." We worked on the pronunciations for hours every day and she taught me, "Anybody calls you 'greenhorn' you belt them." You know. She was a wonderful person. SIGRIST: She liked children. DONNER: Yes. We had a marvelous relationship. And I went to No. 6 school. They put me in kindergarten. And in about two months they advanced me to first grade, and two months later to second grade and until eventually I was at my grade level as I learned the language. SIGRIST: Did you pick English up very quickly? DONNER: Very quickly. It took me no time. SIGRIST: Did you experience any anti-Semitic activity when you were in school in America? DONNER: None at all, none at all. SIGRIST: Did your brother live in a Jewish community? DONNER: No, it was a mixed community. SIGRIST: What was your religious life like once you got to America? DONNER: It was, my brother was conservative. He wasn't orthodox in any manner. He went to temple on the high holidays and perhaps another couple of times a year, and that was it. He wasn't the orthodox person that my father was. SIGRIST: Was there a synagogue nearby? DONNER: Uh, yeah. Not too far away. Within walking distance. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO SIGRIST: How long did you live with your brother? DONNER: I lived with my brother until I got married. SIGRIST: I see. Well, let's talk about the rest of your family that you left in Poland. What happened to them? Did any of them come over? DONNER: No, none of them came over. War broke out before he could bring anybody else over and what happened was when war broke out then the Germans started to blitz the cities, all of my relatives that lived in Krakow and the big cities came to the farm where they thought they would be safe. And they were all rounded up and wound up in Auschwitz. None survived. SIGRIST: And this had been the original intention of your brother, to bring everybody over. DONNER: That's correct. SIGRIST: Bit by bit. DONNER: No one survived with the exception of one uncle who wasn't at the farm at the time. He survived. He eventually came here, but my brother and my sisters and their families and my aunts and uncles and cousins, all in one fell swoop, were rounded up from the farm to Auschwitz. SIGRIST: Before that happened, were you communicating with your parents? Did you write letters? DONNER: No, I did not. I don't know if I felt a feeling of anger or rejection at being sent away, but I didn't communicate. And I remember my brother always asking me to write, harping on me to write home, and I always refused to write. SIGRIST: But he, of course, continued to write. DONNER: He continued to write. He always kept in touch, and I did not. SIGRIST: What was your first job in America? DONNER: I worked in my brother's store. SIGRIST: Doing what? DONNER: Selling and putting cuffs on pants. SIGRIST: How old were you? DONNER: About fifteen. SIGRIST: I see. How long did you do that? DONNER: I did that, you know, weekends, for about a year or so, and then I got a job someplace else. SIGRIST: Doing? DONNER: Selling. SIGRIST: Doing the same sort of thing. DONNER: Selling men's clothing. SIGRIST: I see. So you said you didn't move till you got married. When was that? DONNER: ( he pauses ) 1947. SIGRIST: I see. And to whom? DONNER: I married Sue Sultan. She came from Jersey City. SIGRIST: How did you meet her? DONNER: I met her, I had a blind date in Jersey City with a girl, a friend of mine and I both had dates, blind dates. And we didn't like the way they looked, so we left and went to the Jersey City "Y". And there at the Jersey City "Y" dance I met Sue. SIGRIST: I see. And you were married, you said, in . . . DONNER: In 1947. SIGRIST: In 1947. Well, that kind of brings us full circle here. I just want to ask you one question about your brother. You said his wife died. Did he ever remarry? DONNER: He remarried twice more. He remarried a much younger woman and subsequently had a child with her, a son with her. She died a few years later in childbirth. He remarried again and had a daughter with his third wife. SIGRIST: And did he stay in the clothing business all this time? DONNER: He stayed in the clothing business till shortly before his death. SIGRIST: Did he ever go back to Poland? DONNER: No, he did not. SIGRIST: He did not. DONNER: No. SIGRIST: Well, I guess my final question is are you glad that you came here? DONNER: Oh my God, yes. SIGRIST: It was the right decision. DONNER: I certainly wouldn't be alive today if I didn't. SIGRIST: Did you remain close with your brother, your half- brother, all . . . DONNER: Yes, I did. Yes, I did. He was like a father to me. SIGRIST: And responsible for bringing you here. DONNER: Right. SIGRIST: Well, I want to thank you very much for coming out to Ellis Island and telling your story to us. DONNER: My pleasure. SIGRIST: And I wish you the best. Thank you. This is Paul Sigrist signing off for the National Park Service.