SIGRIST: This is Paul Sigrist with the National Park Service. We are here with Ida Ellis who is celebrating her ninety-fourth birthday. And this is the inaugural, uh, interview in the new sound studio here at Ellis Island. The date is Thursday, August thirtieth. The museum will not open for another week and a half. And, um, we are going to proceed with our first interview. Could you please state your full name, please, and your date of birth. ELLIS: Ida Ellis. August 30, 1896. SIGRIST: And where were you born? ELLIS: In Russia. SIGRIST: More specifically. ELLIS: More? In Minsk. SIGRIST: I see. And, um, can you talk a little bit about, uh, what life was like when you were a child, um, in Minsk, uh, however you say it. For instance, did you come from an affluent household? Were you comfortable people? ELLIS: I came from a comfortable family. Also, we lived very well because my father was a privileged person. He was a scientist and as a result of that he had privileges more than the average person in Russia has. And he was allowed to live wherever he wanted to. SIGRIST: Could you talk a little bit about your mother, too, please. ELLIS: My mother was a housewife raising a family. We were seven children. I had five brothers and one sister. The five brothers were born in Russia and my sister was born in the United States. SIGRIST: Did you live in a big house, um, and did you have animals at all? ELLIS: Not really. We didn't have that because we were a large family of of own and we lived fairly comfortable. SIGRIST: I see. Now your religious affiliations were...? ELLIS: Uh, Jewish. Hebrew I should say, that's a better word. SIGRIST: And was there a synagogue near you? Were you active in synagogue life? ELLIS: Not really. I was too young. And, uh, there was no reason for my...I had a Jewish education, but that's as far as I went. SIGRIST: Were your parents active at, active at all in, in, um... ELLIS: Yes, in some way, but, um, they weren't very orthodox. SIGRIST: I see. I see. Now when you were growing up, now did you live in the same place for a long period of time or did you move? Um... ELLIS: No. We lived in one place for quite a while, up until I was ten years old. And then my father was transferred from the city that I, we lived in... Kiev. And that's where I lived until I came to the United States of America. SIGRIST: I see. And, uh, when you were growing up, did, um, did you, were you surrounded by kids your own age, you know, what sorts of things did you do as a child? ELLIS: As the average child does. I had friends, went to school in Russia, and, uh, then when I came to the United States I entered public school and after about a year and a half I sort of (she laughs) graduated public school and I went on to high school. SIGRIST: When you were in Russia did you, uh, attend school regularly or...? ELLIS: Yes. SIGRIST: You did. ELLIS: Yes. SIGRIST: All your brothers and sisters? Well, your brothers... ELLIS: Yes. SIGRIST: You did. ELLIS: All those that were of age. SIGRIST: Or, and, um, who decided that, that you would come to America? How was this decided? ELLIS: Really my grandparents. My mother's father and mother. Because my mother's family were all here in this country and my mother was the only one that was left in Russia, and my grandparents felt that they wanted her to be here. And that's how we came to this country. SIGRIST: I see. And, um, since, since it was sort of your grandparents idea, how did, how did your parents, uh react to this? Did they, were they resentful that somebody had made this decision for them? ELLIS: My mother was very happy about it but not my father, because my father left behind a very nice position. And he felt that (she pauses), he didn't know what he was going into when he came to this country, which was really sad as far as he was concerned because the kind of things he was doing they didn't employ Jews. So, as a result of it, he had to switch to something else because in those days the, most of the Jewish people were in the clothing business and that's where he went. SIGRIST: Being Jewish in Russia, did you ever experience any anti-Semitic, uh, activity? ELLIS: Well, as far as I was concerned, I wasn't old enough to realize, because, to me, I played mostly with people my own age and Jewish people. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: But they had a lot of resentment. And we had pogroms which I lived through and that remained until this very day. And now I'm ninety-four years old. When I look back I still feel the time that I had when that was taking place. SIGRIST: And you, and you personally witnessed one of these pogroms? ELLIS: I sure did. SIGRIST: Could you talk about that a little bit? ELLIS: Well, it was devastating because they were killing the people, looting and making you very uncomfortable. But there were still nice Russian people that helped hide in places whereby you felt a little safe. SIGRIST: Did, um, did you or any of your family members or anybody that you knew, um, were they killed or hurt or were things stolen from them specifically or were you safe...? ELLIS: They weren't killed but they were stolen, taking away their personal possessions. And, of course, as a youngster, to me that wasn't so important. What was, was the killing, which really remained very impressionable. SIGRIST: It was very scary. ELLIS: Yeah. SIGRIST: Uh, because your father was a rather, was offered privileges in this society that other Jews were not offered, even though you were a kid do you think that he received any kind of, of resentment from, from other people because of that? ELLIS: Oh yes. Definitely. Because people resented it. Why, he was a Jew and he had these privileges. And, of course, as far as he was concerned, it wasn't easy. But he had a very good job. SIGRIST: Yes. Could you explain his job a little bit please. ELLIS: He was mostly into the science business and he did research work on oils such as soap and other things that come along with it. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. Did he work for a specific company or specific school or something? Was he affiliated... ELLIS: He worked for a company. SIGRIST: Do you remember the name of that company? ELLIS: No, I don't. SIGRIST: All right. So your grandparents, did they send you a letter and, say, um, you know, "You're coming to America?" How did, how did they approach this with your parents? ELLIS: They used to write to my mother very frequently and, uh, beg her come and, as a result of it, they sent the transportation tickets for all of us, which...we were a large family, we were eight people... SIGRIST: And this was the boat? The steamship tickets? ELLIS: Yeah. We came here to this country in 1910. And, uh, "Lusitania", I think that was the name of the boat. And that was the last voyage this boat had made. SIGRIST: Now, um, do you, let's talk a little bit about, um, when you were getting ready to go to America. Do you remember, uh, for instance, how did your parents tell you that you were going, that you were leaving your life? How did, how did they approach it with the children? ELLIS: My mother told us that it was time for her to go and be with her family. She had most of her family right in the United States. Her parents were here, her brothers and sisters. And as far as I was concerned it was just exciting that I was going somewhere else. SIGRIST: Do you remember, did they sit all the kids around and, and that's how you were told or did it just kind of all happen? ELLIS: No. We weren't sitting around. It was just told to us that we were leaving and that's that. SIGRIST: Do you remember packing anything up? Or do you remember, for instance, what may be, um, did you pack a special dress? I mean, obviously, you couldn't take everything you owned. ELLIS: We were...(unintelligible), we were allowed (she pauses) to bring whatever we possessed. And, uh, naturally, we brought most of the things with us. And, uh, that's about all. I don't remember, really... SIGRIST: Do you remember, did you bring any, um, food or anything like that? Or did your parents pack china or silver or anything like that? ELLIS: No. We didn't pack any of those things because it would cost too much money to bring those things so we left everything behind and only the clothing that we had we brought here, which was useful when we got to this country. SIGRIST: Sure. ELLIS: Because we came in the wintertime and we had nice warm clothes with us. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. Um, do you remember at all, um, do you remember the port that you left from? ELLIS: We left from Amsterdam. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. So now you had to get from Kiev to Amsterdam. ELLIS: Amsterdam, yes. To Amsterdam we traveled by train. And there we waited for the boat and that's it. SIGRIST: Was the, um, the trip to Amsterdam, obviously must have taken several days from Kiev. ELLIS: Oh, yes. SIGRIST: Um, do you remember how you felt? Were you just kind of bored by it all? Or were you still excited? ELLIS: Well being young it didn't matter because I was all excited by the trip and the things that were taking place. But I wasn't bored at all. There was always things to do. And the boat we had the privilege of roaming around. SIGRIST: O.K. We'll get to the boat in a second. Let's just talk about Amsterdam for a bit. Um, so did, when you were on your way to Amsterdam, did you, did you feel any regret about leaving Russia or were you just... ELLIS: Not at all. SIGRIST: You were just happy you were going to America. ELLIS: Not at all. SIGRIST: I see. ELLIS: I was happy because I was leaving one country and visiting another. SIGRIST: But did you think about it as you were going to be visiting America? You knew you were moving there, right? ELLIS: Yes. SIGRIST: Yes. Um, did you ever think that you would someday go back to Russia? ELLIS: Never. SIGRIST: I see. All right, let's talk about the boat ride then. So, you're in Amsterdam and, uh, sis you have to stay overnight in a hotel or anything while you were waiting for the boat to leave? ELLIS: Oh yes. We spent about eight days in Amsterdam. SIGRIST: I see. Did, did all your brothers and you share a room and your parents share a room or... ELLIS: We had a few rooms because we were a large family. And the transportation was arranged by my grandparents, which was very nice. So I had no regrets about that. SIGRIST: I see. So, um, you boarded the Lusitania in Amsterdam. And, um, do you remember, were you in third class or second class or, uh... ELLIS: I think...I don't remember at the time but I imagine we were in third class. SIGRIST: In the, steerage class. ELLIS: Yes. SIGRIST: Well, let's just talk, what do you remember about the boat trip? You started talking about roaming around on the decks. ELLIS: The food. (she laughs) SIGRIST: Yeah, was it good? Was it... ELLIS: No, I didn't like any of it. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: But somehow or other I managed to go above where they had better food and we managed to eat there. SIGRIST: I see. ELLIS: And my parents brought along a lot of things when they left Russia. And we lived on that and the boat took about two weeks. SIGRIST: Yes. Uh, huh. Did anyone get sick? Did any of your family get sick? Or did you get sick on the boat ride? Were the... ELLIS: I was. I was sick to my stomach. SIGRIST: Yes. Uh, huh. ELLIS: Made it very uncomfortable. SIGRIST: Uh, was it a very stormy sea? ELLIS: Not... SIGRIST: Not too bad? ELLIS: Not too bad. SIGRIST: Do you, um, do you remember meeting any people on the boat? Did you, did you talk to other kids who were going to America just like you? Or... ELLIS: Oh yes. There were quite a number of kids and we, we used to play, play games that we knew and pass the time away. SIGRIST: When you all acme from Russia, did, uh, you travel with other people who were from the same city? You know... ELLIS: No. SIGRIST: There wasn't a group of people who were, you just went...So, um, so, let's, um...the boat arrives in New York Harbor and, um, you see the Statue of Liberty for the first time. Or did you see the Statue of Liberty for the first time? ELLIS: Yes. We did and it was very exciting. They told us that that was a present from the French people which represented peace and love. And with that in mind we accepted it as such. And the landing wasn't too bad. We came to Ellis Island. SIGRIST: How did you, how did you get from the ocean liner to Ellis? ELLIS: Right on the island. SIGRIST: Did they put you on a ferry and take you... ELLIS: Yes. On the ferry. And then my mother's family, brothers came to meet us after a few hours and took us back to my grandma's house. SIGRIST: O.K. Let's not get too, too ahead of the story here. (they laugh) Now when they dropped you off at Ellis, now, um, were there lots of other people? Did you have to wait in line or, you know, you obviously were going into the main building, um, but, uh, what were your impressions as a kid? Did you, were there lots of people or was it empty or were you frightened or... ELLIS: I wasn't frightened but the place was crowded. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: And we had to wait our turn to be examined... SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: For health reasons and for other reasons. And, uh... SIGRIST: And what was the inside of the building like? Do you remember? ELLIS: Very dreary. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: Very unimpressive. And...it felt like...it wasn't very pleasant. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. How did, how did the officials treat you at all...the staff at Ellis? ELLIS: Not too bad because as far as I was concerned they didn't question me. They questioned my parents mostly and I don't remember my parents being very unhappy about it. So, as...and then we met our uncle that came to take us. SIGRIST: Do you, uh, do you remember what you were wearing when you arrived at Ellis? Did you put on a special dress or do you remember any of that? ELLIS: Definitely. My parents had made for each and every one of us new clothes. We came with very nice clothes here, which as a result of it was very useful because they were all warm things and we... SIGRIST: What, what do you remember very specifically what you were wearing? ELLIS: I had a nice coat. I remember my father had a coat which was mink lined with a fur hat. My mother had a nice coat. We were all dressed very respectable. SIGRIST: I see. And, I'm sorry, what was the date when you arrived? Do you remember? ELLIS: Uh, February 10, 1910. SIGRIST: 1910. ELLIS: 1910. SIGRIST: 1910. uh, did you eat anything when you were at Ellis? Did you buy lunch or anything like that? ELLIS: No, no, no. My uncle took us back to my grandmother's house and that's where we had a big spread and welcome. SIGRIST: Uh, let's talk a little bit about the, um, processing procedure. You say they, they examined you medically. What did they do exactly? Do you remember? ELLIS: Well exactly what they did I don't but I know we were told we were examined for tuberculosis, for eye disease and other kinds of, uh, diseases...such as sores. We didn't bring any kind of vermin with us. And if you... SIGRIST: Was that all kind of scary for you, for you to... ELLIS: Yes. But as far as I was concerned I didn't care because I kept myself very clean. We were taught to, whether we had the priviledges of using anything. But my mother on the boat made us get washed every single day. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. Was that easy to do? Was there plenty of water to wash yourself with on the boat or...? ELLIS: No, we had to do the best we knew how. SIGRIST: I see, uh, when you were at Ellis, when you were waiting around at Ellis , because you said you were here for a few hours, do you remember seeing people from other countries? Did you talk to anyone while you were here? Because, I mean, you were fourteen so I mean you were, you were an older child at that point. ELLIS: Oh yes. SIGRIST: Or was it just neat things that you saw? ELLIS: No, no. You spoke to other people. You tried to make acquaintances but we weren't here very long on the island because we were taken off by the relatives. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. You said your uncle came to meet you. And, um, and then, um, how did you get off the island? ELLIS: We got off the island, I don't remember how, but I do know we went down the subway. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: And that was my experience. Very exciting to be down, down below and traveling. SIGRIST: Uh, how do you think your parents felt about all of that? With all these children and, uh, trying to keep tabs on them? ELLIS: It wasn't easy because after all, when we came to this country we had to be dependent upon my grandparents to take care of us. And my father wasn't able to make any connection as far as work was concerned so it took a while until somebody helped him...to get with the clothing business. And, from then on, it became a little better. And we moved from my grandparents' to an aunt of mine. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: And it wasn't very pleasant living with so many people in a four room apartment. SIGRIST: Um, let's talk a little bit about your father and his work situation when he got here. Now you said before he didn't, uh, he didn't really, right off the bat, get a job. Um, did you all have to chip in and get odd jobs or, you know, how did the family survive in the situation like that? ELLIS: Well, I'll tell you, we did a lot of things. We used to do all kinds of things at home. There were such things as, they used to give out work to take home and, uh, do it in your house. My brother had three jobs; he used to work in a grocery store in the morning delivering milk and rolls, in the afternoon he went to school, and after school he used to give lessons to foreigners in English. SIGRIST: He spoke good English himself. ELLIS: Yes. By that time he learned the language because my parents said,"You're in this country and you must do as they do Don't bring back what you left!" SIGRIST: And, uh, how did your parents go about learning English? ELLIS: My mother went to school at night. And my father managed, somehow or other, he didn't find it very difficult to learn the language because he was an educator himself. SIGRIST: Uh, uh and when, was there any resistance in your parents to this kind of Americanization or were they very happy to sort of give themselves over to being American? And to learning English? And to doing that sort of thing? ELLIS: They weren't resentful to learning the language and being here but it was hard for my father to adjust himself because he couldn't find work that he was accustomed to doing and he had to switch to something that was very different than was his way of life. But my mother liked it because she met her family, her parents and to her it was very pleasant. SIGRIST: So how did your father finally get the job? Do you remember? Was it somebody that he knew or... ELLIS: Somebody in the family helped him to get the job in a clothing line and from there on that's what he did. SIGRIST: Now when you say "in the clothing line" what, what did he do specifically? Was it factory work or was it...? ELLIS: Yes. It was factory work. He learned how to make patterns for men's clothing. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: And then eventually he went into business for himself. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. Which, this is really dramatically different than what he was doing in Russia. ELLIS: Yeah, definitely, definitely. SIGRIST: It must have been a... ELLIS: It was...he was beside himself. SIGRIST: Yeah. Was he very sad a lot of the time because of having to do this? Or... ELLIS: Yes. To him it was a different life entirely but he was here and he had to get used to it. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. I see. ELLIS: And he did the best he knew how. SIGRIST: All right. Well, let's talk about you at this time. Um, you're settled in and you're living with your uncle, I believe you said you lived. ELLIS: No, with my grandparents. SIGRIST: With your grandparents, right. Did you go to school right off the bat? ELLIS: Yes. My grandparents made sure that we all entered public school. And, of course, I went to public school until I was about fifteen or better. And, uh, I was happy that I learned the language and then I went on to high school. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: And I graduated high school and I went to work. SIGRIST: I see. And what did you do? ELLIS: I worked in an office doing some kind of clerical work and I was earning five dollars a week. (she laughs) SIGRIST: (he laughs) Uh, when, did you stay in New York? Or were you...? ELLIS: We stayed in New York. SIGRIST: And were you still living at home at this point? ELLIS: Oh, yes. SIGRIST: I see. ELLIS: We all lived together. My brother went to work for a drug store, it was. The name of the drug store was "Ligetts." It was in Manhattan. And he, too, managed to educate himself and became a pharmacist. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: And the rest of the boys went to school until it was time to graduate. From there on each one looked for jobs. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. I see. With, with such a big family and without a lot of money, what did you guys do for fun? For entertainment? Did you...? ELLIS: (they laugh) In those days you didn't look for entertainment, you were glad you had enough money, enough for food and to clothe yourself. However, once in a while, we used to go to the movies. And the movies used to be five cents for two people. So each one of us chipped in five cents and five cents would pay for our entries and the other five cents for refreshments. SIGRIST: I see. Were you a musical family at all? ELLIS: No. SIGRIST: No. Um, how about food. Was your mother a good cook? Or did she do the cooking or did Grandma do the cooking? Who did the cooking? ELLIS: No. My mother managed to do the cooking. And she did the best she could. But naturally in the beginning we had a lot of help from my brother's family, from my grandparent's and also from her sisters and brothers. SIGRIST: I see. Is this financial help, do you mean specifically? ELLIS: Yes. Financial help. SIGRIST: I see. So, um, so any, any, was there a large extended family around? Were your uncle and aunt all around your grandparents too, so...? ELLIS: Yes. We all lived in Harlem, around 100th Street and, uh, all around we had family. If we, uh, we wanted to do this, to do something, we visited family. We had lots of cousins. And there was a lot of fun being with the family. SIGRIST: I see. O.K. We have to stop for a second because I think they're running out of tape. O.K. So this is part one of our interview with Ida Ellis. And this is Paul Sigrist...O.K. This is side two of the interview with Ida Ellis. This is Paul Sigrist for the National Park Services and it is August 30, 1990. Um, Mrs. Ellis, why don't we talk a little bit about your marriage and your family and what happened at that time and, and follow it through with your life. Uh, when did you marry? ELLIS: Well, by the way, my life started when I was about eighteen years or so. I lived through World War One. SIGRIST: Yes. Did any of your brothers fight? ELLIS: Yes. Not my brothers, they weren't old enough, but my uncles did. SIGRIST: Yes. ELLIS: And, at the age of eighteen, naturally I was still working. When I was about twenty-seven I met my husband. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: I married in 1922. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: And from there on I had a very happy life. SIGRIST: Did any of your uncles, uh, were any of them wounded or get hurt at all during World War One? ELLIS: No. They were all in the, really, in the heat of the thing but... SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: They managed to come back. And, uh, and then, uh, I had given birth to my daughter. SIGRIST: This is 1920's, right? ELLIS: Yeah. SIGRIST: When was she born specifically? ELLIS: 1923. And I had a very good husband that was a very good provider. SIGRIST: How did you meet him? ELLIS: I met him through family. I...one of my aunts was friends with his sister. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: And I came to visit there and that's how I met him. And I knew my husband from the time I was about sixteen years old. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. What was his name? ELLIS: Samuel Ellis. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: The name of the island. (they laugh) And, uh, I had a happy life until the day he passed away, which he died of a heart attack. And I am a widow now for about twenty-seven years. Right now I'm ninety-four years old, living in a senior citizen place, very beautiful. I'm very happy there. And here I am trying to convey my story to Brian, to Paul. (they laugh) And, uh, what else can I tell you. I accumulated...I had a very busy life. I was an active person and, uh, I indulged in a lot of charity work. SIGRIST: Like what specifically? ELLIS: I worked for a group of women. We were thirty women. The name of the group was "Hanit." It's spelled H-A-N-I-T, which stood for Help All Needy In Distress. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: And our aim was for research which we...we ran bingo games and accumulated money. We donated to the Brookdale Hospital in Brooklyn for research for diabetic children. Close to a quarter of a million dollars. SIGRIST: Wow. What are the dates of this? When were you active? ELLIS: Actually I can't remember exactly the date. But I know I did that for sixteen years. I did bingo work and all that money that we accumulated in bingo went to charity. SIGRIST: I see. ELLIS: And then I was interested in also, uh, Jewish education to better schoolings that we had. We had, we had very poor schools and we improved it. SIGRIST: Was this in Brooklyn? ELLIS: No. All over New York City. SIGRIST: Oh, just in general. ELLIS: Which improved a lot. That's number two. SIGRIST: Uh, huh. ELLIS: There were many other things that I did which was for humanity and that kept me going to be ninety-four years old. SIGRIST: Did, um, did your husband participate in these activities also? Or, uh, what did he do for a living? ELLIS: My husband was in the building line. He wasn't, he wasn't interested in organization work because he had a busy life with his own business. And he was a good provider. (she laughs) SIGRIST: And you had one child? ELLIS: Yes. Only one. And right now I have two grandchildren and two greatgrandchildren. My grandson is a professor at the University of Oakland. He teaches computer and also psychology. And he has one child, nine years old. My granddaughter graduated the University. He, by the way, my grandson, I should go back to him, he was an honor student when he graduated public sch...not public school, high school. He took the college exam and he was the tenth person with his average on the list, which gave him priviledges of going to any university that he liked. But, instead, he wanted a car. So, (she laughs) his mother said, "If you want a car, you have to go to state school." So he chose to go to Rutgers. And he graduated Rutgers with high honors. And he did his graduate work in Berkeley. SIGRIST: Sounds like he has the same sort of intellectual inclination that your father did. Actually that... ELLIS: Yes. SIGRIST: That kind of well rounded kind of person. ELLIS: Yes. Well, my father came from a very educated family. And, uh, that's him. And my granddaughter graduated the University of Maryland and she went to work and today they're married. Both have each one, one child, which gives me a lot of pleasure. And I've lived to see four generations. SIGRIST: Indeed, that's a, that's... ELLIS: And what else can I tell you? It was interesting. SIGRIST: (he laughs) Well, I think that this has been a, a really wonderful interview. Uh, I want to thank you for, uh, for giving us your time and for being our very first. It is your birthday. ELLIS: And thank you for taking me. (Paul laughs) After all, if you didn't take me, I wouldn't be able to do it. SIGRIST: I suppose that's true. So, uh, this is Paul Sigrist for the National Park Service and I'm signing off with Ida Ellis, celebrating her ninety-fourth birthday here with our inaugural sound studio interview. So, uh, that's it. ELLIS: Thank you very much. Okay.