LEVINE: Today is November 16th 1994, and I’m here in the Oral History Studio at Ellis Island with Malvine Fainberg. Mrs. Fainberg came from Belgium in 1941 when she was twenty-three years old. She arrived at Ellis Island with her husband and her three-month old baby. Well, I’m very happy that you’re here and I know we have a limited time for this interview so we’ll try to move quickly. 

FAINBERG: Yes.

LEVINE: Perhaps you can tell me what it was that led up to your leaving Belgium?

FAINBERG: Well we left Belgium because of Hitler, and we went through France, and had my baby in France. Then we went to Portugal where we sailed to America.

INTERVIEWER: Did you stay in France for a while?

FAINBERG: Six months. 

LEVINE: Uh huh, and had you had any first hand experiences with Hitler or with the rise of…? 

FAINBERG: No, no. We always were ahead. My husband was in the army though, in the Belgium army, and I fled with my parents-in-law and we were reunited in the south of France.

LEVINE: I see. So is that where you had your baby in the south of France?

FAINBERG: Yes, in Marseilles. Yes. 

LEVINE: Okay so do you remember the departures? The actual leavings? When you left Belgium, when you left France?

FAINBERG: Well, Belgium was invaded on May 10th, and the city of Antwerp was bombed, and we left for the coast, and from there as we heard that Hitler was advancing we left Belgium over to France. And as Hitler was advancing we moved on, until we got to the south of France, and they had a sort of armistice, and was a demarcation line. And there we stayed and waited until I heard from my husband and was reunited with him, and there my baby was born, and a few months later we left France, and we went to Portugal, and we sailed from there. 

LEVINE: I see. Now had your husband been in the Belgium army up until the time you actually left?

FAINBERG: Yes, yes. He was in the army when we left. We lost each other for three months until we were reunited. 

LEVINE: Okay and so you left from Portugal. What do you remember about either before you left or the actual voyage?

FAINBERG: What…on Portugal?

LEVINE: Yes.

FAINBERG: Well Portugal was really good already. We stayed three weeks in Portugal waiting for the boat, and we left on the American line—the Excalibur—and we were first class; this was a very good trip. I mean no problems.

LEVINE: Can you describe the accommodations on ship? 

FAINBERG: Oh I had very good accommodations—first class. We had two cabins, one for my in-laws and one for my husband and myself and the baby, and the food was very good, naturally, and it took ten days. 

LEVINE: Were there steward passengers on that ship?

FAINBERG: That I don’t know…I don’t think so, maybe, I don’t know. I really wouldn’t know. No we had a very good trip.

LEVINE: Were a lot of the people who were sailing with you, were they people who were also fleeing?

FAINBERG: Oh yes sure. Of course, yes. 

LEVINE: So you must have felt wonderful to have gotten away?

FAINBERG: Oh yes, of course—very happy, and happy when we arrived here I had a brother waiting for me, and then we were called back, they called baby Alan Fainberg back on board ship, and we went to the immigration, and they said your baby want to enter the United States illegally, you have to go to Ellis Island. We will not separate the baby from the parents, and we both had to go. 

LEVINE: Well could you describe what happened when the ship came into the harbor?

FAINBERG: Yes.

LEVINE: Did you see the Statue of Liberty?

FAINBERG: Yes it was a thrill. That was a big thrill, yes, yes. 

LEVINE: And then the ship went to Battery Park—landed?

FAINBERG: I suppose so, yes. Yes, and we got off and we were met by family and friends, and we were about to get into the car to go to the city, when the announcement came over the loud speaker, and we had to go back. 

LEVINE: So you were about to get into the car and you heard this?

FAINBERG: That’s right. That’s right, and then they said that if we get to Ellis Island before three o’clock we would still have the hearing. But we got there naturally after three o’clock and had to stay overnight. 

LEVINE: Describe your impression of Ellis Island when you got here.

FAINBERG: I was very sad, and I cried all night long, and I was with my baby alone in a room with eight beds and crib because the men and women were separated naturally as you know. And the next morning when I asked when the hearing would start, the matron said to me ‘what boat did you come on?’ and I said the Excalibur. She said ‘well we are three days late, you have to wait.’ I was very upset, and I said to my husband, I was crying, and I could see now this man opening the door at nine o’clock sharp, and called for the fist hearing our baby Fainberg, and we were called in. There was a judge, and we were questioned and had to swear that was our baby. And so on and so forth and then my sister-in-law came, and they told her she was responsible to take the baby to the post office and have him finger printed. We went to the main post office on 34th street, we came up, they said ‘can we help you?’ and my sister-in-law said ‘we have to register this baby and fingerprint him.’ They said ‘who sent you here?’ We said ‘the immigration,’ and they said ‘we don’t fingerprint babies,’ and so my husband said ‘just give us a piece of paper to tell that we were here.’ And that was it and then we went on home. 

LEVINE: What sense did you ever make of why this happened with your baby?

FAINBERG: I asked. I said you know the consulate in Marseilles said everything was in order—that the baby’s name should be on the passport—and when we got to Portugal, my husband went to the consulate, to the boat company, and they said everything was in order, so I mentioned that to the immigration officer, and he said ‘my dear lady if you would know what the consulate in Europe doesn’t know what you’re supposed to know, you’d be surprised.’ 

LEVINE: So did you ever figure it out?

FAINBERG: No.

LEVINE: …to your own liking?

FAINBERG: No, no, no, no. Just that we had a visa and I suppose that because the child did not have a visa, but I was told that he did not need a visa, he just had to be on the mother’s passport. That’s it.

LEVINE: Well it may have had to do with smuggling babies in. 

FAINBERG: No, I don’t think so. I don’t think so. I really don’t know…I really don’t know and I didn’t care anymore because we were safe and that was it. 

LEVINE: Well what are your feelings about Ellis Island? 

FAINBERG: Well it was at that time, it was very clean. I had a room to myself. It was not bunks like we saw in the movies. We had beds. The food was good, and clean. But we just stayed overnight and I had dinner the night before, and breakfast, and that was it. 

LEVINE: What about the other people who were here at the time you were. Did you meet anybody?

FAINBERG: No, not really. I was too busy with my baby…I was too busy with my baby and… upset, naturally.

LEVINE: And how is it for you seeing Ellis Island now after all these years?

FAINBERG: Well naturally it brings back memories. It brings back memories. It was a very unhappy day for a first day in the States, but I got over it. 

LEVINE: And how about the rest of your life—just sort of a thumbnail sketch—you went from here, you mentioned you went right to Forrest Hills?

FAINBERG: No, I went for…we didn’t have a house yet. I went to my brother in Brooklyn, and then we bought a house in Forrest Hills, and then we moved into Forrest Hills, and then we lived there ever after. 

LEVINE: Is Alan Fainberg your only child?

FAINBERG: No I had another son here in the states.

LEVINE: And his name?

FAINBERG: William.

LEVINE: William, uh huh. Let’s see is there anything else you can think of about coming here, living most of your life here, about being an immigrant?

FAINBERG: Well I was young enough to adapt quickly. It’s not like…the older people took was more difficult… my in-laws for instance, was more difficult to adapt, but I was young enough to adapt. My family was here and friends and so on, so this was really my home, and I lived longer here than in Europe. 

LEVINE: Did you speak English when you came?

FAINBERG: Yes, yes, yes, and my husband did too.

LEVINE: Okay is there anything else that you can think of before we close?

FAINBERG: No, no. Not really, not really. 

LEVINE: Well I want to thank you very much. This was on such short notice, and it’s a pleasure to meet you. 

FAINBERG: You’re very welcome. You’re very welcome. 

LEVINE: And thank you.

FAINBERG: Thank you too.  

LEVINE: And now your story will be on tape for posterity here at Ellis Island. 

FAINBERG: Thank you.

LEVINE: Okay, this is Janet Levine for the National Park Service. I’ve been speaking with Malvine Fainberg.

FAINBERG: [corrects] Malvine. 

LEVINE: Malvine Fainberg, and its November 16th 1994 and I’m signing off. 
