CLOUTIER: October 17th 1984. This is Dennis Cloutier with the Oral History program. What’s your name sir?

FEDER: The name is Joseph Feder.

CLOUTIER: And where were you born sir?

FEDER: I was born in a town by the name of Chortkiv that was part of Galicia, and Galicia was a province of the Austrian empire. At that time the Austrian empire was quite an empire. We had Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, Moravia, Bosnia, had Segovina… Mocovina, all these parts were part of it just like the United States. We didn’t have forty-nine or fifty states, but we had probably about twelve or fourteen states including… incorporated into the Austrian-Hungarian monarchy, that was part of the…in Austria, Kaiser [Francioso] was a Kaiser, an emperor, and in Hungary he was a king, so it was a double monarchy. And I was born on the Austrian government. 

CLOUTIER: In what year?

FEDER: In nineteen hundred and three (1903). I was born April the 8th nineteen hundred and three.

CLOUTIER: What was the political feeling of the country in those days?

FEDER: The political feeling in…well you mean not when I was born. When I was born, I couldn’t tell you.

CLOUTIER: Well, as you were growing up.

FEDER: As I was growing up, the political feeling was this: it’s quite a difference from the United States. Over there, you take up three languages beginning in your public school. The language of the country was German, just like Germany, an Austrian language is German—that is called the mother tongue—but in part of Galicia being Poland, today Russia also part of the [Okraina.] We were taught Polish, complete same as German, and [Ukrainian], and so as a youngster you learned three languages. You were already a linguist by the time you reached the age of ten and eleven. By the age of eleven you entered your… the end of ten, the age of eleven you entered high school: the first year of gymnasium, which like spelled over here gymnasium, which we use for workouts, over there high school was called gymnasium, and in gymnasium you wore uniforms not like over here just plain clothes. You wore in the summer white and in the winter black. And the first year of your high school—you didn’t have such a thing as a junior, compared to the United States—your four first years were sort of junior; you wore a silver bar on a straight collar like a uniformed Austrian officer, one silver bar was the first class, two the second, three the third, and four the fourth. When you began the fifth, that was already like you…the next four years for let’s say high school. One gold, two gold, three gold, and four gold, after that came university. So at the age of—when I was young—I  already spoke three languages. Beside at home my people being of the Jewish faith, I spoke Jewish. 

CLOUTIER: Was the country experiencing prosperity in those days?

FEDER: In those days we didn’t know such a thing as being absolutely poor. We had in town, a few beggars, who would like to say professional ones. We had professional mourners like you see in the nearest films that run after bodies and cry and carry on, we had the same things in the old country over there. But my father being a custodian of a big…one of the biggest rabbi palaces in the world, which no one would believe a thing like that existed. It was fabulous; it had its own stables. It had its own sulkies, and no automobiles by that time, we hadn’t been to war. War broke out although the rabbi didn’t have any automobiles—only horse and buggies. And we had a tremendous garden, which was like say half of central park. That’s how large it was. Working for them, my father was a tinsman by profession, but he contracted to take care of the entire palace. The roof of the palace was cathedral type all the way through so naturally the snow in the winter had to be taken off otherwise the thing would cave in. So he had a contract for that—taking care of it was part of his job. I remember many a times at the age of eleven, I went out when they were opening the ceiling on the roof-which they were using…what do you call the flame? Blowtorch. To loosen up the ice so we could get the heavy weight off the roof, and he was also versatile in electricity. So poorness I didn’t know because if you needed something, in his spare time he made pots and pans in his house. The pots and pans that he made, the neighbors—they paid in Austrian coins and Austrian kronen in that time, so we didn’t know no such thing as being poor. We knew very wealthy people, but poor to go out and beg…we had a very nice life. We had good food, we had clothing, and my brother was even sent away to stay with his uncle in a town that you had to take a railroad, overnight drive to go to gymnasium because at that time my town didn’t have it. But when I was at the age of eleven, that’s when we had it. But my brother’s time before me, he had to go out to school. So my father had to support, my parents had to support him. So we didn’t know such thing as poverty. 

CLOUTIER: Well having such a good life at home, what made you want to come to America.  

FEDER: Well let me explain this to you, then came the war. In 1914 I was eleven years old. The Austrian army and the first ones to come in on horseback was a Hungarian regiment, and they plus artillery started to roll, the town that I lived in, I was born in was about a thirty kilometers from the Russian border. So they went into Russia unopposed. They were there two days when the German planes, which at that time the language called every German plane was known as the [unintelligible word in German] which means ‘dove’ in English. You could see high up a very small dove, speeding along, and the size of a dove, that because they were very high in the air and the artillery shells burst way at bottom of them, they were never hit, because they didn’t, couldn’t reach them that high, and the duvets, the German reconnaissance spotted a huge…spotted a huge…are you working? 

CLOUTIER: Yep.
 
FEDER: Spotted a huge Russian army moving towards the Austrian border so they got the order to withdraw.  They withdrew. They started to withdraw and the townspeople started to run after them to the railroad station. And then to the last train that we couldn’t make—it was all filled up, we couldn’t get on—was shot off the track anyway by that time, by the Russian artillery. So we remained in town, and we stayed on the Russian regime for two and a half to three years, and that’s where I completed perfect Russian. I learned Russian because our school was stuck completely. I was in the service for the Russian Red Cross by permission of the Austrian [gymdomerie] telling them that I’m not carrying any weapon, but I’m working for the sake of the epidemics that we had. We had epidemics where people drop dead in the street, something you never think that anyone could outlive. We had cholera, typhus, two kinds of typhus: [unintelligible] and stomach, small pox, dysentery, and what do you call that?…oh that’s about as far as I can recall. And we went out…we went out at that time, the only way to combat this was going into a house with masks, young men that we wore and some holsters, our mattresses were [saclawed] in straw. The middle class and the poorer class had no mattresses that we have over here. The rich did have them but springs. But the poor had sacklaws and they filled it with straw. When we came to a house where there was such an illness, we took the mattresses, and if the bed was wood, we took the wood out, sprinkled it with gasoline and put it on fire. That was the only way to combat it because they were very dangerous diseases and you had plenty of fleas, bedbugs, and lice. Those were three things that when I came to the United States, I never saw them in my life, again. So now leaving there, while I was there, the Russians withdrew after three years. The Austrians and the Germans came back to town. When they came back to town my older brother, who was at that time with the general staff of the Austrian army; he was at that time, they called it… and drafted, instead of being drafted, he was with the general staff at their legal, with the legal staff, and he phoned me from Lemberg, which was the big city known as Lviv today, to come and see him, from my town which took an overnight ride.  So my mother packed baked bread that I took to him, and I came up to see my brother. When I saw my brother he said to me, he spoke to me at that time: ‘I’m going to come out on top and we’ll get in touch and then maybe I’m going to bring you up to meet in Vienna.’ That’s where he lived and he practiced law in Vienna. 

CLOUTIER: Now he was with the Austrian army, right?

FEDER: That’s correct. I didn’t see him for many years because I was in the Russian occupation. 

CLOUTIER: Mm-hmm.

FEDER: When this happened my brother was let out of the army, he sent for me to continue my studies in Vienna, and for my mother. But my mother remained a while because my father was ill, and my father died, my mother came out to Vienna too. While living in Vienna from 1917-1920 and studying electro-engineering, I got a letter from my sister, I mean at that time you got more than one. She said the next one I’m sending you a ticket to come to New York, and you’ll come to America. 

CLOUTIER: [Interrupts] Where was your sister?

FEDER: In New York at that time. She was working here in New York buying garments in the garment industry. So I had a choice. My father’s brother, which is my son, my first-cousin, retired from the Austrian army as a coronel; he commended a regiment that built bridges, [pontoons] laying over water for the army and artillery to cross, and you wouldn’t believe that, you’d think I’m telling you a story. He was an orthodox Jew, a coronel, an orthodox Jew, you would call him in a book like…of course he didn’t have the locks, but he was a [Hasid, a Hasidic] as they call them here…strict, religious, kosher, all the way through, and he had a battalion of men that were Jews. Wherever they traveled if they were staying a few days, they threw up a big tent or a wooden frame house, and that was their synagogue. They had with them two Torahs, they worshipped, they had with them the necessary… necessities for services; they had their kitchen never served meats, because they couldn’t get kosher meats, so they served only dairy and fish. So this man came in Vienna to my house and said to me Joe, I am leaving, and at that time it was Palestine, not Israel. ‘I am leaving for Palestine, if you want to come with me, you got to promise me that you will revert back to Judaism, because right now you are not a Jew, you are smoking on the Sabbath, you’re not eating kosher food, you’re not doing the things that your religion wants you to do. Now if you promise me that you will drop all these things, and you revert back to the Jewish laws, I’ll take you with me to Palestine.’ So I told him at that time—his name was Joseph too—and so I looked him up in Israel when I traveled from here. I said Joseph, thank you very much but my sister sent me a ticket, and I’m going to New York and that’s how the trip was arranged. The trip was arranged from Vienna by orient express to [Unintelligible: 0:16:25] Zurich and to Paris, and Paris to put us up for two days at a hotel, a small hotel, and from the hotel after two days, we were always supervised by the Federation of Jewish Philanthropists, because I wasn’t the only one, there was a whole group of us together. Then they took us to Le Havre by train, and they put us on the [Lorraine] at time, one of the boats belonging to the French trans Atlantic line. The trip took eight days. We had a very stormy trip. I did not go steerage, although there was a steerage class, which I saw. There was very…you couldn’t even enter it; it was just the stench would kill you and the stench was mostly from vomiting. People were not used to travel, especially the storms that we had that tossed the border around and most of the people were ill. I had a ticket for third class, and in my cabin there were two upper and two lower bunks, and I was lucky enough to travel with three American farmers, and they taught me a couple of English words. The first thing on the morning on the eight day, when we came into the harbor was the Statue of Liberty, and calm waters, everybody was raising their hands here at last we are in a country where the streets are paved with gold, and everyone was naturally happy, but we did not land right away in Ellis Island. We were on a Brooklyn pier instead of a Manhattan pier, and they discovered there was one person sick with typhus so we were in quarantine. We were in quarantine a few days—two or three days, and I remember the day distinctly, the last day of quarantine when the bomb exploded in Wall Street, and then a horse and buggy carried in …one of the buggies driven by a single horse, there was a bump in that buggy and they were saying it was the communists or the reds even in the year of 1920. There was starting over here a little bit of unrest; you had it maybe at that time you had a labor ticket, and you had the worker, and your newspaper for which was an extremely radical comparing to the times in the world newspaper. So while I was on that boat, my sister couldn’t come up to see me. She took a row boat, which somebody rented, paid a man, and he rowed around at the bottom of the boat, and she was yelling up to me, and the first cigarette I smoked were Chesterfield’s. She sent me up a carton of Chesterfield’s. Then it came to disembarking. I did not stay overnight in Ellis Island. 

CLOUTIER: So wait a minute. You were quarantined for three days on the boat?

FEDER: Yes.

CLOUTIER: Okay.

FEDER: And then they took us off by [tender], and they brought us to the island. In the island we were grouped together and then marched single file in line. There were rails like you walk into a movie that’s got the two rails put up—the velvet rope—but this were rails of iron, like you can hold on at a boats railing, and you walk one back to the other until you reach a desk in front of you, a small table and on it was an American…American government…I don’t know what you call them…we call them inspectors, or whatever they’re like you have over here when you import things—they are the people that come to inspect your baggage—what do you call them?

CLOUTIER: Inspectors.

FEDER: Inspectors. They were sitting at the table; they were uniformed. I remember it was a dark uniform and I came before the man after the man had somebody else stood back a few paces. Your next; they asked me what language do I speak. I said German, because at that time I didn’t remember much Jewish, but German was in there, or Polish. He said ill speak to you in German, and he said ‘where are you going?’ I said ‘I’m going right here to New York. [Are you running low?] I’m going right here to New York, and in New York my sister is here to receive me, she’s the one that sent for me.’ He says ‘have you any money?’ I said ‘besides some Austrian money—kronen—I have a ten-dollar bill—American money. ‘Boy you’re a wealthy man, you got ten dollars, you’re a wealthy man, go ahead.’ I went out of the line to the grass, it was August and out there stood the people from HIAS, do you know of that organization? The HIAS, stood there, received us, took us all and transported us to the building, which is now still on Lafayette, but no more HIAS. Now you got playhouse in there. I went to several performances so I know the difference and there were tables set with all the dairy goodies you could mention. Cream cheese, lox, sour cream, bagels, rolls, rye bread, corn bread, anything herring, pickled herrings, schmaltz, eggs, anything you wanted and the women stood around you ‘come on eat, eat, don’t worry, go ahead, eat. Don’t worry just keep eating.’ I said okay no more, that’s enough…he said ‘where you going?’ I said ‘I’m going to east New York, east New York, part of Brooklyn’s city line on [Unintelligible 0:23:41 ] avenue. My sister had an apartment for us on Sutter corner, and now I went back to see that neighborhood and it’s all bombed out. If you look at that neighborhood there you would think the war was over there and not over in Europe—everything leveled. There wasn’t a house up for miles, and that was the most congested Jewish ghetto so to…it wasn’t a ghetto, but the Jews wanted to be amongst themselves, it was actually very few but there are some one or two blocks further up which are Italian, and they remained, the colored people never got in there. They don’t sell their property unless they get permission of whom they sell the house to, so their surroundings still remained Italian but mostly the houses where Jews lived in the east New York area are all ripped and bombed out—nothing there anymore—and I lived there from the year that I came,1920, until after prohibition, and then I moved to New York—got married and moved to New York. 

CLOUTIER: So back on Ellis Island you had no medical experience at all?

FEDER: Back on Ellis Island I did not stay overnight. I didn’t have no medical experience. I had no…they didn’t feed me there. They just brought me by tender there to check in and check out. Because they didn’t check me out…maybe if I had been second or first class they might have checked me out through the boat, but being third class they took me by tender into Ellis Island, and baggage, and then I stayed in line until I was interrogated. 

CLOUTIER: You didn’t see any doctors looking at your eyes or your…? 

FEDER: [Interrupts] Oh yes, yeah, that they examined me. While I was…before I reached the man, they examined me especially for my [Glaucoma] that was one thing they were very…and then examined your chest to see if you have TB or anything like that. I was pronounced okay and then that’s how I went to the desk. 

CLOUTIER: Did they use the stethoscopes?

FEDER: Stethoscopes, yes. 

CLOUTIER: And how did they check your eyes?

FEDER: By turning over the eyelids, and I still remember I think they used a pencil in those days, and a pencil I thought was the eye that rolled right up on the pencil, and they looked in it. Glaucoma they saw right away on the eye if you had it, so.

CLOUTIER: Did this make you nervous?

FEDER: Well naturally it would make you nervous. I felt how anything wrong with me God forbid they would want to send me and send me back. Who wanted to go back? I didn’t want to go back. Because as things worked out, the fates preserved my family, myself, my brother, my mother, and my sister was here. Otherwise none of us would be here, because my brother would have been the first to go being an attorney in Vienna when Hitler marched in, after the…killed Dollfuss and arrested Schuschnigg after him. They would have shot him…period…they would have had no…and myself well I would have been long gone. I would never be here at eighty-one. That’s fate.

CLOUTIER: Were these thoughts going through your head as you were waiting in line?

FEDER: Well when I was waiting in line, the only thing at that time that I was thinking of is that I hope that not anything with me is not medically wrong. So when I came through the examination and I was pronounced okay, and shipped further, as they looked me over and they shipped me into the line further up here front, I knew when I passed the line of the doctors yeah I felt relief. Naturally you feel like you are new born because you’re going into the world something in there, and then you’re so near it, the land of promise…the land of well… its like the Lord promised the Jews the land of Canaan and that was it. They were going towards the land of milk and honey, I’m going to get to the land where gold is paved…where the streets are paved with gold. Here they’re going to keep me out of it; the feeling was bad, however. 

CLOUTIER: Did you really hear those stories that the streets were paved with gold?

FEDER: Of course, there was money and gold in America. Actually [pluck it] …when we came here but I want to tell you something, you bought a suit of clothes for seven or eight dollars and for fourteen or fifteen dollars you were a model, a head was two dollars, you were…money comparing the worth of the money comparing to now. I left my sister’s house and went out looking for a job with a quarter in my pocket. It took me two nickels—a nickel up and a nickel back to go to east New York into Manhattan—with the elevator it was ten cents, and for fifteen cents and a [sandwich] along from the house, and for fifteen cents you used to get into the Jefferson Theater on Fourteenth Street, after having finally ending what you could see a motion picture for fifteen cents. Try that today.

CLOUTIER: How did this compare with your prices back home?

FEDER: The prices back home were… when I left… the prices back home were far and far out of this world. The prices back home were already even when I still went to school, my brother put me out, all of a sudden they had Austria was the only country there left that had electric bolts on a market yet. And [Sophia Bulgaria] or anyone of the neighboring countries, they didn’t have it, it didn’t come in, they didn’t manufacture, and they didn’t bring it in…They didn’t bring it in, so when the market opened up, my brother sent me out to every electrical supply store or housewares store that sold bolts, and I was buying them and buying them at first at about twenty-five kronen a piece, then at fifty, then forty, and he was selling them for a hundred and fifty—two hundred, and the price was no object and for five hundred Austrian kronen, in Austria you could buy a lot of things. So it’s quite a difference over there then it used to it kind of… and come over here the money is so valuable. The American penny is so, so valuable. 

CLOUTIER: So even though the streets weren’t paved with gold, you weren’t disappointed?

FEDER: No I wasn’t disappointed because I didn’t realize when my cousin gave me a job, and the job was being a busboy even though I didn’t speak English…on Broadway in Times Square on Forty-Third Street, at one of the top restaurants, at St. Regis restaurant. I was doing business night and day, and my cousin by marriage was the president of the company that owned about fourteen restaurants. They wanted to bring me in and give me a break, and they paid me as a busboy working twelve hours a day, two dollars a day, and the waitresses whom I served, there were two busboys on the floor; we had sixteen waitresses. I worked for eight, and he worked the other side for eight. After each lunch, the waitresses counted their tips and they gave us ten percent of their tips, and that amounted in the end of the week sometimes including my pay. I came home with thirty-eight to forty-five dollars. That was big money, and I became very loose with that; I became a spender and started at seventeen years of age, I started to you know shoot my money as if I’m a millionaire. We bought things, the money had value, you went out, you spent it, you had a good time, I was single, and until one day I rebelled against it. I said I should… came to America to mop floors, to mop a toilet in the restaurant, it was beneath me. I mean here… I’d had company here and it was the kind of work to do to carry dirty plates and glasses. I rebelled so I got myself an electrician’s helper job for fourteen dollars a week, no order money, fourteen dollars a week, and had to go and drill holes in the beams, you know—rip floors, and we pulled the wires through and setting the boxes for switches, and the boxes to make to put in the outlets. You know because the study of electro-engineering, I figured I’d become an electrician because right away I was told I will not make it in the United States as a Jew. I will not make it to become an electro-engineer because the Edison company did not hire and the telephone company didn’t hire a small percentage—a ratio of ratios of Jews at that time, which is the truth—Jews had to stick to a certain part of work: either in restaurants, or work by cloaks, maybe tailoring garments, restaurants, or sell—become a salesman of some sort or to get into a engineering line until World War II—when they discovered brains like Einstein, and a few ordered people; they discovered that some of the Jewish people had brains which would be a shame to waste. They exploited them so they learned that some of the Jews could produce and work under any conditions, and become good attorneys, doctors, engineers, et cetera. 

CLOUTIER: Did this make you disillusioned with American way of life?

FEDER: It did not make me disillusioned. It made me in later years as I learned it to see especially now, that we fought for ages to get some recognition and the colored people got it so fast, and they still rebelled that it is not enough, and wherever I work today—not that I’m against them, I’m for them because I’m anti-slavery—I I believe a black is a human, I’m a white and he’s a black they’re human. They’re human and they should be given the courtesy and they should be given the opportunity that every human is entitled to never mind what their color is. However, the disappointment lied in this: that they pushed so hard, and whenever I enter today a bank, or any other place where at one time a Jew couldn’t even apply for a teller’s job, and today is nothing but blacks. You talk about discrimination, I think its being discriminated against the white race, forever when I walk into institutions I see nothing but black, especially the post office, you walk in the general building in the post office, you will see nothing but black people. So naturally you come a little bit disillusioned that things are not running…at one time they were running pretty much against them. Now all of a sudden you’re getting a lot of pressure, and they still think they are not getting enough, and somehow just to keep things going, they are getting more and more—not that I wanted to be taken away, deprived of it—but  but what I can’t stand when a man like Jackson goes out and talks against Jews, where Jewish people died on the way to Selma, Alabama, and to march with Luther King, for them to put down four Jewish boys, put down their life for freedom, and he goes to work and sells himself to the Arabs, to our Semitic cousins that are doing us wrong—that’s the thing that you get disillusioned in, in the world. That disillusioned that people…if you are my friend, and I do you a favor, and then you turn around and you knife me in the back. That’s disillusioned. 

CLOUTIER: Did you ever keep in contact with anyone from the old country? Family or?

FEDER: From uh…yes, some friends. Some we met to organizations which you call the country—the town you come from, has and the special in New York—they have clubs, associations, where they create for themselves a organization that primarily first thing offers you is burial grounds, and that’s what you’re interested in. When you come in here and you don’t belong to anything, you have to have a place not to wind up in [potter’s] field so you join the society of your hometown, and the society of your hometown is right here in the city of New York—created by some of your countrymen that came here before you and after you. And if you joined together—Jews help keep it up—and they bought a plot in which they erected a cemetery, and they also raised their money at social gatherings, and outings, et cetera where you contribute or buy your tickets, and that goes to doing good…to give their money for free [Unintelligible: 0:39:51] traffic purposes. 

CLOUTIER: Was this HIAS with—in your case?

FEDER: Pardon?

CLOUTIER: Was this HIAS in your case?

FEDER: The HIAS?

CLOUTIER: Yeah.

FEDER: The HIAS didn’t go for them although they do…need anymore…they didn’t go for them although they do. They take care of your further around if you come here and you needed more. I didn’t need them…that I just said thank you very much, they didn’t ask me for anything anymore. They may write you a letter for a contribution, during the [Unintelligible: 0:40:20], or they wont tell you anything, or come or they want to do anything for you. Once they bring you up they sever the relationship with you unless you want to donate money to them and continue if you have it. If you don’t have it, they don’t press you. Some organizations keep pressing you. 

CLOUTIER: What was your feeling when you…you just went to Ellis Island this year didn’t you?

FEDER: Yeah.

CLOUTIER: …to visit? What was your feeling?

FEDER: The feeling was there with my daughter and my son especially [Recording skips at 0:40:40] 

CLOUTIER: A lot of memories?

FEDER: Pardon, yeah my wife couldn’t go she was operated on. We were in a hospital and then she was recuperating already in the hospital, feeling better, and the kid said come on pops we’ll take you to Ellis Island, so I came in there. But I was disappointed in one thing but Jean explained it to me. In New York City everybody gives a courtesy to senior citizen, by cutting a fare or a movie in half, and you come to the ride to the park, you pay the same on there as they... and I said ‘the government will do that to you?’ and Jean explained it to me “its not the government.’ ‘Yes but the government ought to be able to step in, what’s the matter with that?’

CLOUTIER: Especially for former immigrants, huh?

FEDER: I mean no, not for immigrants, for senior citizens. 

CLOUTIER: True.

FEDER: Not that the dollar made me any poorer. I mean they say the idea is why should this boat be exempt, why should this movie take me in for half price? Why should I go to see you Los Angeles for three dollars and you go in and pay five? Why because I’m a senior citizen. They extend the courtesy to me and give me the ticket for three. Now you come over here and I said well hey say Uncle Sam is discriminating against me so now I know it’s a private line, and if it’s a private line then I have no regrets. I’m nobody. I may have a beef but no regrets.

CLOUTIER: How many years have you been married, Joseph?

FEDER: Pardon?

CLOUTIER: How many years?

FEDER: Fifty four years; this is my 54th year to one woman.

CLOUTIER: Same one. How many children do you have?

FEDER: One. The first one was born still. That was when my wife’s father had a heart attack…the pregnancy…it was a boy at seven months. She was told she would never have any children, and I took a maitre d' job in 1940 in Palm Beach, and she conceived and thank God I got my daughter. She’s a wonderful gal. As a matter of fact we were only back two weeks. We were there for seventeen days; we had a wonderful time. I have two grandchildren and that’s why I have two grandsons and no granddaughters.

CLOUTIER: So you’ve lived in New York City most of your life then?

FEDER: That’s correct. I traveled through the United States and Canada, but I lived in New York City. They want me to go to California but at this stage in the game, its tough to make friends in an another city where you’re unknown, especially at our age. 

CLOUTIER: Did you make any lasting friendships on the boat?

FEDER: No. Coming over? No. I remember it lasted maybe a couple of years because on Second Avenue in those years, we had primarily being a Jew…we had Zionist clubs and we had liberal [Unintelligible: 0:44:12] Zionists, which was a laboring you know, stringing a little bit left of Zionism, becoming sort of a socialistic idea. And on Second Avenue or off Second Avenue, there would be these small hotels that had big holes; at that time they had a lot of them on Second Avenue, especially people would hire them for marriage…for weddings and bar mitzvahs and all parties. So they had smaller rooms and we used to meet, and still out today where some of those buildings where those organizations meet. We used to meet there every second Saturday at night or every third Saturday in a small room, and then you slowly drift away. But you meet a father-in-law who makes like you join his lodge, and he’s either an odd fellow or a mason, and you forget all about all these small other things, and you sort of keep on going in life to make other acquaintances and other conquests. 

CLOUTIER: Do you think the immigrant experience made you a better American than for people who born here with freedom?

FEDER: Well, I wouldn’t say make me a better American. I would say made me appreciate life and work, and everything that I do. Instead of…like today its American youth wants to…they think they’ve had enough, they quit school when they’re fourteen or fifteen. They think they’ve had enough education; they cant even read English, their own language, and we come from over there and we are forced to study—actually forced. And then when we come to it today, and Europeans come here, and the first time I came here I had no knowledge of English, that’s perhaps why I lost my European accent, but that I learned it here because most of the Europeans that come today—that migrate today speak English, and even the refugees from Germany they came to speak English, they took it out there, they expected one day to run away and they took English up to help them along their career over here. So never mind the accent, but they spoke English but our youth doesn’t want to know that. Our youth doesn’t want to know from working. I worked for a long time even when I was an executive. I came into the Biltmore hotel at my office. My secretary came in at 9 o’clock in the morning and by 4:30 she was going home. I was in at 7:30, which, at that time, I was Assistant Banquet Manager, and [Bob Moore] was the Manager.

CLOUTIER: Banquet manager?

FEDER: Yeah. I was the Assistant Banquet Manager, and he started as the Assistant, and then when he went to the plaza, I became the Banquet Manager of the Biltmore. So my secretary came in at 9 o’clock, a few minutes later. I was in at 7:30 with Bob Moore and one day he made coffee he made a fabulous coffee, sung better than a million dollars can buy, what’s the name of it? I stopped in and took two containers for the donuts, and the next morning he did. And we came into our office at 7:30, looked over our sheets, looked over our bookings for the week, and we had time to look it over for two weeks to see what’s coming up, what we have to work on, and if he had a party at night, we didn’t leave the headway or just take care of it, we stayed until the party was through and that may be midnight or later. On a Saturday night we would stay till two or three in the morning when we had a party because you came to me, and you were spending ten thousand dollars on your party, and you knew Mr. Feder not the head waiter. You want to see me there to be assured that everything is going to run the way I promised you it will, never mind the paper. If I go home, you wouldn’t be happy, you’d be worried. So I was there constantly so I put in twenty hours. But mostly American born children don’t care for that; see that’s where the foreigner has the edge. He is used to hard work. The American child, well if he doesn’t learn it from earlier childhood on then…I know my two grandchildren are doing nice around that until you got there today… You had a lot of trouble—they didn’t want to study. Now with one now, I have one now who has just been made front manager for the play house, and California, but he started in the back. He’s a genius with a camera, and he’s a genius with electricity. He can install your… wire your house for television or for telephone, and he knows it and that’s what he wants as his future—special cinematography. He worked for the theater in Santa Monica, at a small theater that’s being kept open by grants. You know they’re in the red. They have no money. Donations from wealthy people and wealthy actors keep them going so he donated his time and he was their stage manager. He improved, he wired, and he worked, and he did carpentry and all of that at eighteen years old—very nice, very ambitious. Last week when we were there, he comes home and he’s been promoted. He’s now the manager in front and he’s getting sixty five dollars a week, and he goes to college only three days a week, and the mathematic scores they’re not giving him until next year. So at least he is learning the hard way, but  the younger one still hasn’t reached that way, he’s fifteen, they still have home ideas, parental support and do things. Where the fine children are not brought up that way, they go out and earn, where they learn and see, where they go out where the farmers go out and work in the field, you know, to help their parents. They are brought up different. Over here we spoil our kids, I’m not saying that you are spoiled. You are a hard working man, but you are a young man. We do tend to spoil our children.

CLOUTIER: Did you ever think you’d make it to eighty one?

FEDER: To tell you the truth, no. I might not have if I wouldn’t have given up—and I’m not giving this as an ad to people to say stop smoking—but I believe in it. But fifteen years ago my wife had an [Unintelligible 0:52:08 ] ulcer, and she had to be operated, and the doctor told her if you don’t give up smoking Mrs. Feder, stop coming to me. I don’t want to see you. So I thought it over sitting across from the table, and I’m puffing away on camels all day long and she’s got to give it up; it’s not fair. I gave it up with her and I attributed it to two things. Somebody up there loves me and that I gave up cigarettes because I used to cough very, very bad. People looked at me as if I had sixteen years ago as if I had TB because the coughing from cigarettes was bad. 

CLOUTIER: Did you ever want to live anywhere other than New York?

FEDER: No. I might. Lately I might feel that Id like to be nearest to the one child and the two grandchildren I have in California, but then my wife says what… I can’t be pestering them everyday. I can’t see them, come to them everyday; they have a life of their own so…
 
CLOUTIER: So when you first got here was it the excitement and the bustle…
 
FEDER: [Interrupts] I loved it. I enjoyed it very much. You wouldn’t believe it when I first got here and I worked at the St. Regis in Times Square on 43rd Street. In the 1920s we walked from Times Square on 43rd when we were through working at night, which was some time early 8:30 or 9:00 o’clock. We walked to Harlem to 116th Street. 

CLOUTUER: Whoa. 

FEDER: Walking, not riding. For some people that wasn’t a walk. We weren’t going to maritime, we were just brisk walk, we were going to Steinberg’s Daily Restaurant for a Danish and coffee. From one restaurant where we worked, we were going to the other one. So you can imagine how we liked it. And then it was a different life all together.

CLOUTIER: What was the subway like in those days?

FEDER: Subway ride?

CLOUTIER: Mm. 

FEDER: Better than today. Much better. 

CLOUTIER: [Laughs] How much? 

FEDER: Today I don’t ride the subway, only bus.

CLOUTIER: How much was the subway?

FEDER: Five cents but nobody, first of all, nobody approached you for money, ‘mister can you spare?’ That only started in the Second World War, ‘mister can you spare a dime?’ you know. But even that wasn’t bad, but now walking… have you been to California? When I walk down to Venice, which is part of Los Angeles, lower part, where they have all like…here Greenwich village, young ladies skating on roller-skates, on boardwalk, on the sidewalks, that only wear G-strings over here and very short bandanas over here. I mean it’s a crazy, crazy world. And when you walk the main street, a guy will come over to you, with a kerchief around his head holding his long hair, and he’ll say ‘I’m a little short. I need a dollar eighty five towards a meal. You want to give me a dollar eighty-five please?’ People asking for a quarter or a half a dollar, or a dollar eighty-five. You figure out he needs a dollar eighty-five. It’s a different world all together; the world keeps changing. I hope maybe it will be for the better. 

CLOUTIER: That’s what makes it interesting, huh?

FEDER: Pardon?

CLOUTIER: That’s what makes it interesting?

FEDER: Right. 

CLOUTIER: Things changing. Well it seems about…

FEDER: I think we covered a lot of things here.

CLOUTIER: We sure did. So your experiences on Ellis Island were basically happy? 

FEDER: On Ellis Island I have no regrets because I didn’t stay there. I didn’t sleep there. I only came there for one day. I came there in the morning and we were let up by afternoon. We were let out, and I remember being for lunch in the HIAS, brought in there, and then I remember going off…my sister was at work. When she came home she found me there. 

CLOUTIER: You must have thought you were in heaven when…?

FEDER: [Interrupts] Well I was a little embarrassed, not with her. My cousins lived on the floor above, so naturally I stopped at their house first, and when I introduced myself to the young ladies in the family I said in German [speaks German] you know which means ‘I kiss your hand young lady,’ and I actually did. They drew the hand back; they didn’t know, they were so shocked by that mannerism; they didn’t understand it. When my sister came later, I explained it in the customs in Vienna as all-together different in Austria than over here. And then naturally people liked my politeness, and mannerisms which at that time...that’s one thing over there people have manners, and over here usually most of the children, they drop their manners constantly. When I see somebody walk out now, when I see a young man open the door, I’m shocked because in the subway—not in the subway in the bus because I don’t ride the subway—who do you think gets up to give me their seat? A young lady or a middle aged woman, not a man. A young lady, not a young man. 

CLOUTIER: Did you see any other differences in customs when you first got here or things you’ve never seen before that you wondered what was going on? 

FEDER: Well not…no I came here young. I did the customs. I didn’t want oh what’s the same in every part of the world it was the same thing. As a matter of fact when you came here they talked to you when you have a song or somebody speaks with a double meaning, especially a sexy song with a double meaning, and they are…not because they don’t want to shock you but because…I left that in Vienna in 1920. We had American bars over there that we went to for a show at night, and there they went, of course I didn’t go with a grown up, because the grown ups were accompanied. But we heard the songs that were actually had a double meaning for every word. Yet nobody made a big how-do -you-do about it, a big to-do about it…I guess the world is the same—things come slower somewhere and they go on faster some place else. But in general people are people and they are nice. You found most of them…I found most of them very nice because I had in my younger days, years back, I used to be a maitre d' in a country. I used to go away for the summer to summer resorts, and the college man wouldn’t let me live. They keep calling me up at home when I worked nights during the winter; I couldn’t sleep. I had my telephone was listed in my wife’s name. Everybody was looking. Every student was looking for a job to go with me out there. I had nothing but students as waiters and waitresses; I had young ladies from Jersey State Teacher’s College; they went to work for me as waitresses. They made in the ’40s…they made eleven-hundred, twelve-hundred dollars for their July and August…June, July…part of June, July, and ten weeks work, and those years they made that money for college tuition. They were from poor families; they needed it, and to me the most pleasant surprise in my life was when I was in a place in New York. Do you know New York? How long have you been in New York?

CLOUTIER: A couple of years.

FEDER: Huh? 

CLOUTIER: A couple of years. 

FEDER: Oh, before your time we had on 8th Avenue and 15th Street there was a place called Roger’s Corner; it was opposite the old medicine square garden. You weren’t here when they had the medicine square garden on 8th Avenue. That was the big restaurant and biggest bar in the world, and World War II it was jam packed with soldiers. They were going over seas or coming back, and I was in charge of a small room called the Pan-American room; we had in it a novelty orchestra called the Corn Cobblers and they gave a show on—it was beautiful—people came from all over to watch it—small room—and reservations were at a premium; they had to take care of the head waiter to get in. One day from the first big room, in comes the bouncer. He says ‘Joe’ he says, ‘I got the entire Air Force outside there. They want to come in. They want to come in to see it.’ But he says you got no…I says ‘let them in. They want to come in to see me? Did they ask for me by name?’ I said ‘Let them come in over here then.’  Maybe they don’t want to stay. Sure enough they were