MOORE: This is Kate Moore for the National Parks Service and today is the fifth of December, 1993 and I’m in Coldwater, Michigan at the home of Charles Fisher who came from the Netherlands in 1912 when he was nine months old. Why don’t you begin by giving me your full name and date of birth please?

FISHER: Charles Fisher. Born June 11, 1911.

MOORE: And how do you spell Fisher then?

FISHER: Fisher. F-I-S-H-E-R, and the old country was in Friesland. [Unintelligible mumbling about the town of Friesland at 0:0:43]

MOORE: And what size town was that town?

FISHER: About fifteen hundred… I think…I realize that.

MOORE: And what was…do you remember anything…have you ever been to that town or seen it…you were nine months old?

FISHER: Yeah. 

MOORE: Yeah.

FISHER: Oh when I was…oh I haven’t either have I?…no…no…not since when I was in there in the army…no, no I never went back.

MOORE: And what was your father’s name?

FISHER: Robert or Rippert. Rippert Fisher. Robert Fisher. 

MOORE: And how would you spell it in Dutch?

FISHER: R-I-P-P-E-R-T.

MOORE: And what was his occupation?

FISHER: [Laughs] He was a farmer I guess—if they had them over there. 

MOORE: And what did he look like?

FISHER: Oh he was a good-looking guy just like his son [whistles] don’t put that in there…about five foot ten and weighed one hundred and seventy pounds or something like that. He was smart…smart as a whip. He was a soldier so must be good for military.

MOORE: And what was his personality and temperament like?

FISHER: He’s good. He had it the right way. 

MOORE: Hold on for a second…and his personality or temperament how would you describe it?

FISHER: He’s a kind-hearted guy but he liked to have his own way. Definitely, yeah.

MOORE: And is there a story about your father that you remember…that people tell anything that characterizes him?

FISHER: He was a prohibitionist. He didn’t like liquor or this or you know. He wouldn’t even like Coca Cola probably. He liked the coffee. He liked coffee—coffee at nine o’clock; tea at three o’clock.

MOORE: Hot chocolate?

FISHER: No.

MOORE: And how about your mother’s name—what was your mother’s name?

FISHER: Her name was Pattjia. P-A-T-T-J-I-A I think. Fisher. 

MOORE: Mm-hmm. Fisher. 

FISHER: Andela.

MOORE: Her maiden name was Andela?

FISHER: Andela.

MOORE: How do you spell that?

FISHER: A-N-D-E-L-A.

MOORE: And what did she do for a living?

FISHER: Take care of fourteen kids.

MOORE: And what did she look like? How would you describe her?

FISHER: She was always in the kitchen. Well she was a nice looking girl—woman—and classic brown hair I would say…always busy and always willing to help if she had the time you know.

MOORE: Was she tall or?

FISHER: No she’s short. She’s short in the stomach I guess.

MOORE: And her personality?

FISHER: Good, fine, something like somebody I know. Mm-hmm.

MOORE: And her chores around the house—taking care of the children and what else?

FISHER: What did she do else?

MOORE: Yeah.

FISHER: Well she cooked for one and cleaned house and that’s about all the time she had. 

MOORE: If you could tell a story about your mother that you most appreciate what would you tell?

FISHER: I’d have to make it up I guess. Nothing I could…sentimental. She’s just a good person—a parent. She had to be.

MOORE: And how about all of your brothers and sisters…how many did you …you said fourteen?

FISHER: Fourteen.

MOORE: And could you name them please?

FISHER: Oh yeah. I’m going to get the first four or five mixed up but there’s Joe, Garrett, Irene, Arnold, John, Alice, Frances, Elizabeth, Sadie, and Robert, and Dale and Charles. Did I miss somebody? There’s fourteen of them.

MOORE: Good, and what about your house. What do you remember—you obviously came over here at nine months—what did you hear about your house before that was in Holland? What did they tell you about your house where you…?

FISHER: I think the same house that Irene told you about. It was a new house…it was kind of a row house I guess you call it nowadays probably—kitchen, a dining room, and plenty of bedrooms you know.  

MOORE: And um well the things about you remember about your house…we will move on because we have Irene’s account.

FISHER: Yeah. I didn’t need a house [laughs].

MOORE: What did your family tell you about their experiences on the boat—your parents’ experiences coming here or why they came here?

FISHER: We came here because we were starving in Holland. We just had not enough to eat. Dad worked for…oh he peddled milk. I know he did do it on the [Unintelligible: 0:05:44] cart and he’s a farmer and he’s a solider; he’s must have done about everything.

MOORE: And did they ever—how did they tell…what did they tell you about their journey and what happened to them? Did they talk about it very much?

FISHER: No. No. No just the same thing Irene told you—they got to the restrooms and did one thing or the other and I guess it was embarrassing for them but [Unintelligible: 0:06:08] they outlived it [laughs].

MOORE: Well what about your life at home with your parents—how did your parents feel about living in America?

FISHER: Oh they felt great. Oh yes. Soon as we…actually we left to go to Philadelphia I guess and then to [Martinsville] and even Martinsville had nothing then you know like they were used to but it had much better than what they had in Holland.

MOORE: Did they say this to you when you were children? Did they express this to you?

FISHER: No I just heard a lot…heard a lot…heard hearsay.

MOORE: Yeah.

FISHER: No I even…I was only nine months…a year old…they didn’t do a…

MOORE: I know you were a year old when you came.

FISHER: They didn’t talk much to me about it. 

MOORE: Well um…I’m going to move on to other things…do you think that the expectations of your parents were fulfilled in America?

FISHER: Was there?

MOORE: Were fulfilled? Do you think that they came when they wanted to…

FISHER: Oh goodness yes, yes. Dad wanted to do that for years. He wrote to farmers in Oregon, Washington, and up in Canada to get a home for the mother and dad and the kids, and in Iowa there’s a pretty close…we moved to Iowa once. Mm-hmm.

MOORE: And what is the first memory that you have?

FISHER: Of Coldwater?

MOORE: No of your childhood…what’s the 

FISHER: Coldwater. Coldwater. 

MOORE: Coldwater. Coldwater since you are the youngest.

FISHER: We had either milk or a [Unintelligible: 0:07:40] …I can remember the house because it had porcelain all the way around it—that’s all and then we moved to Coldwater in ‘17 in March and the war started in ’18 and I started school at seventeen. 

MOORE: In 1917 you started school? Now what language did you speak at home?

FISHER: I spoke Fris, that’s I said I had to learn to speak Fris with my folks and speak English to my teachers. I was a smart guy wasn’t I?

MOORE: [Laughs] And do you remember you spoke first Fris and then…

FISHER: [Interrupts] I spoke Fris. My folks wouldn’t understand English, you know.

MOORE: So you spoke it at home and played with the children in Fris.

FISHER: That’s right.

MOORE: And when did you learn English?

FISHER: The same time I learned Fris I suppose. Yeah. 

MOORE: With your…with whom would you speak English then?

FISHER: My brothers. My brothers. 

MOORE: Oh so you spoke English with…

FISHER: And my first grade teacher, Mr. [Doty] back in 1917.

MOORE: So um did you have any difficulty learning English at all?

FISHER: No, no I didn’t know any better. 

MOORE: Do you have any stories about them—anybody making fun of you for speaking Fris?

FISHER: I… no. I wouldn’t…

MOORE: So you never were in any way…

FISHER: [Interrupts] We were just good-hearted guys.

MOORE: But then remember your sister Bess said that they made her sing songs in Dutch. Did they ever ask anything like that of you?

FISHER: Mm-mm. They didn’t well…we sang Dutch in school but none of us…we…ours was a big school. Ours had six rooms–six grades you know—probably thirty or forty people in the rooms.

MOORE: Did you have any other friends at school that were from your region…that were from Holland, the Netherlands? Did you have any friends—children—who were Dutch?

FISHER: No, no. Well we had a baker in town. [Unintelligible: 0:09:25] They were Dutch and I couldn’t talk the Dutch because I can’t talk Dutch. I talk Fris so I couldn’t talk to anyone and they couldn’t talk to me either I guess. 

MOORE: How about your parents could they talk to…?

FISHER: Oh yeah. They could speak with him too because see in Holland you go to school and learn Dutch; you come home you speak Fris. So if you go to school there you talk Dutch otherwise your [Unintelligible: 0:09:55].

MOORE: [Laughs] Now when you were a child was your family religious at all?

FISHER: No.

MOORE: And you grew up most of your life in Coldwater is that true?

FISHER: Mm-hmm. Seventeen or over eight years. Mm-hmm.

MOORE: And when you were a child what did you do for entertainment at home?

FISHER: Ha-ha we had crazy games and played with the neighbors I suppose. We had neighbors in town. The [Flagler] family I remember them very well. 

MOORE: Were most of the other children in town immigrant children or were they…?

FISHER: [Interrupts] We didn’t have any. We were the only ones in Coldwater.

MOORE: You were the only immigrants in Coldwater? What about the…wasn’t the [Vandyke] family…the Vandkye family didn’t live in Coldwater did they?

FISHER: Oh they… lived close to my dad. Mm-hmm.

MOORE: Yeah, and they were immigrants?

FISHER: Yeah they were from Holland too. They didn’t move to Coldwater until they were married. Mm-hmm.

MOORE: So basically you were the only immigrant children 

FISHER: Oh yeah.

MOORE: And did you feel different from other children?

FISHER: No. 

MOORE: No. 

FISHERL I was just as smart as they were.

MOORE: [Laughs] So do you think that your family…your family members adjusted to life here quickly?

FISHER: Beautifully. Beautifully.

MOORE: What about your…

FISHER: I remember the war started in seventeen and it was over in eighteen and had a big celebration here at eighteen and I must have been eighteen and the kids… my dad went out and got us three horns…poof…you know the victory was over. [Unintelligible: 0:11:25]

MOORE: And that...how old were you then?  

FISHER: Seven. 

MOORE: Seven years old.

FISHER: Mm-hmm.

MOORE: And what about the fact that your parents didn’t speak English do you think that limited their social life or?

FISHER: Well it sure did but they didn’t care for social life. They were…they had a family and a lot of work and that farm was three hundred sixty five acres. We didn’t have a tractor…all horses…eighteen horses and eighty-three some cows. 

MOORE: Well how did he do business if he didn’t speak English, your father? I mean how did he manage…

FISHER: My brothers, my dad, and mother and everyone got out there early…

MOORE: So basically your….

FISHER: My brother Garret, and [Ott], and John, and Pete, and Irene, Jan—they all did the business side. 

MOORE: So they did the public relations?

FISHER: That is correct, that’s a good word. Mm-hmm.

MOORE: And your parents ran the show?

FISHER: Yeah. Mm-hmm.

MORE: So your father basically—was world was the farm…

FISHER: Mm-hmm.

MOORE: …and working that and so he needed contact.

FISHER:  Big dairy man.

MOORE: Yeah and was he always in dairy?

FISHER: Yeah I guess he stayed there for four years, and bought a farm on Grand Street and I lived there for twenty-five years myself, and it was a ninety-acre farm. Forty or so…fifty [Unintelligible 0:12:52]; he was a dairyman all the time. 

MOORE: And what was your house like? Describe your farmhouse you lived in Coldwater then?

FISHER: Oh the first one—now that was a fabulous home. That had six bedrooms and bath…

MOORE: Which one was that?

FISHER: On the big farm yeah.

MOORE: On the big farm.

FISHER: Yes my mother was in heaven you know. 

MOORE: Running water?

FISHER: Running water, bathroom yeah.

MOORE: Inside?

FISHER: Inside. 

MOORE: Plumbing?

FISHER: Plumbing.

MOORE: What about lights?

FISHER: On Moore Street mm-hmm. 

MOORE: And was it lit by—what type of lighting was it?

FISHER: Electric. Electric lights. Oh in fact way downtown…the farm is way down town now. Do you know where our career center is, you probably don’t? That used to be our three hundred…six hundred-acre farm; it’s the school now. 

MOORE: And what do you remember from those days?

FISHER: It must have been awfully good memories. We used to milk the cows this way…right after…

MOORE: By hand?

FISHER: No by machines. 

MOORE: Oh yeah. 

FISHER: We’d run a milk over a cooler, just a circle cooler; we’d cap all of the bottles by hand to use that you had paper and gloves… in glass bottles; half pints and pints of course.

MOORE: Did you homogenize the milk?

FISHER: No, no. No, no word. We had three wagons—milk wagons, and the horses knew where to go and the horses knew where to stop. It’s true.

MOORE: And did you work on the farm…by yourself?

FISHER: Not much.

MOORE: Not much?

FISHER: No see I was only I guess seven or eleven when I left the big farm. It was a big farm. Do you have a farm? No I was a spoiled brat [laughs].

MOORE: All right so this big farm you left when you are about eleven years old and went to Coldwater and then that’s when your dad bought his own farm right?

FISHER: Yeah just about half a mile west of our big farm; our house still stands…our house still stands…the old house. 

MOORE: And who lives in that old house…anybody in the family?

FISHER: Oh no, no, no. They had a fire in it and it should be torn down. It’s right in a deluxe area in Coldwater—the southwest part of town. 

MOORE: So you um…that little, that little farm your father had, how many acres was that?

FISHER: Ninety…Ninety. Forty acres total and fifty acres of pasture. 

MOORE: That was the small farm though?

FISHER: Mm-hmm and we made a living on it. 

MOORE: Yeah.

FISHER: Now you can’t even…they laugh at you know. It’s a good garden spot for forty acres. We had a good life. 

MOORE: What do you remember best about your childhood in terms of most fondly?

FISHER: Well its just…just mighty fine living that’s all.

MOORE: And you were the youngest of fourteen?

FISHER: Mighty fine living. I was the youngest.

MOORE: Spoiled?

FISHER: Well of course the girls weren’t home anymore; they were all domestic help. As soon as the girls became sixteen and got out of school, they got a job and then one thing they didn’t tell you…when the girl had a job and money, dad made them pay back the fifty-five dollars passage to America. The girls paid but the boys didn’t have to because…fifty-five bucks it cost to come over. Now you got that to get to Detroit [Laughs]. 

MOORE: What…did you have any family tragedies that occurred during the time that you were…?

FISHER: No just beach drowning. My brother drowned. Mm-hmm

MOORE: And he was saving someone’s life you said?

FISHER: He was saving two boys’ lives and he got them to shore and then my brother was with him and he couldn’t find Pete. Pete I’m talking about. So he put my brother in his rowboat and took the rowboat to the bridge…. it was just a year and a couple of days after they married… mm-hmm…Pete drowned. [Unintelligible: 0:16:54]

MOORE: Were your parents alive then?

FISHER: Hm?

MOORE: Were your parents alive?

FISHER Oh yes I should say so because this happened in ’27.

MOORE: In 1927 and now you grew up in that farm and then what happened? You went to school, and then what did you do after that?

FISHER: When I graduated… and dad said you got to get work …so I worked at the [Unintelligible: 0:17:20], creamery for a couple of summers I guess–something like that and then our neighbor next door had a dairy…so I peddled his milk. I started out with a little carry on a bicycle and then I got a little coastal wagon and pulled that to school and then after school I come back home.  

MOORE: Well if you look back on your life and you grew up in a family that immigrated here and found life here but then kept some of their old traditions—how did…in any do you still feel those old country traditions are with you? Do you?

FISHER: No oh except like tonight we’ll probably have hot chocolate because it’s Santa Claus tonight in Holland. You always have hot chocolate and marzipan in Holland.

MOORE: I understand so you still…you still keep some of the traditions? Some of them?

FISHER: No, if you think of it. If she [Unintelligible: 0:18:13] you’ll get coal tonight, yeah. 

MOORE: Because tonight’s December 5th.

FISHER: December 5th? 



MOORE: And did you have the same Santa Claus tradition?

FISHER: No he comes tonight.

MOORE: He comes tonight. Did he come tonight in your house?

FISHER: No, no.

MOORE: No, so when you came here you adopted the American traditions?

FISHER: Mm-hmm. The 25th. 

MOORE: What about skating, did you skate?

FISHER: No, I was nine months [laughs].

MOORE: But you said your father was a big skater?

FISHER: Oh yeah and my mother was too because Irene…yes…yeah

MOORE: But when they came from Holland to here. 

FISHER: We couldn’t skate; there wasn’t water. 

MOORE: They didn’t skate here at all?

FISHER: Oh, no. Where would you skate? Roller-skate?

MOORE: No there were skating ponds don’t they?

FISHER: We don’t… or did have… just didn’t pay for it either [laughs].

MOORE: Well what about…okay…so then you eventually married. Now how did you meet your wife?

FISHER: Well we just…we just must have known each other but not that fast you know. She wanted to go to a dance with somebody—with a couple—and we went and I didn’t dance. I still don’t dance and she still don’t like it, well you know [laughs].

MOORE: Wait a minute. So you went…you met her at a dance and you didn’t dance then and you still don’t, but you married her?

FISHER: Mm-hmm. Well she’ll… went to the theater anyway…yeah like a movie and just after that we didn’t go but stayed here and I don’t think I even had a car.

MOORE: And how old were you then?

FISHER: Well I was twenty-three or four when I got married.

MOORE: How long did you know each other before you got married?

FISHER: About nine months—very short. [Hollywood]. 

MOORE: Fast worker.

FISHER: Hollywood rewind you know [? Unintelligible: 0:19:58] [laughs].

MOORE: And is your wife the same background? Is she Dutch?

FISHER: No she’s not Dutch no. She’s born by the [Unintelligible: 0:20:08]. 

MOORE: And her? What is her background?

FISHER: Well she… her mother wasn’t well; she died from TB before her dad got killed so she’s an orphan from 1918 on. And he had a shack standing with this outpost and of course she had inherited the shack from him and her grandparents—his father and mother—lived on Washington Street just over here; they moved in here, and before she graduated, they modeled the home, but she was…she was very alone person. Mm-hmm.

MOORE: And you um…did you have children?

FISHER: Three.

MOORE: Three children?

FISHER: Charles, Norman, and Virginia. 

MOORE: And what do they do?

FISHER: Norman’s in the…Charles is in the Navy Intelligence in Washington, D.C. and Norman is a federal [Unintelligible: 0:21:10] in Southfield and Virginia is a librarian at the [Quincy] school—just over here—six miles. 

MOORE: Are they interested at all in your Dutch background? Have they…Did you pass anything on down to them?

FISHER: No, no I would say no. 

MOORE: So of all the children in the family, you were the youngest?

FISHER: Mm-hmm.

MOORE: Do you think that…would you say that you had a weaker background in the Dutch…by the time it got to you…

FISHER: [Interrupts] Oh yeah. Oh goodness, yes because then my brother’s Garrett, and John, and Ott- it was…they knew all about it.

MOORE: Did you ever…you went back to Holland?

FISHER: No. 

MOORE: You never went back?

FISHER: No, mm-mm.

MOORE: You said something in the war—you were back there? 

FISHER: I was in [Unintelligible: 0:21:53] but not in Holland. I was Staff Sergeant in [Fort Worth], California.

MOORE: Were your children ever interested in learning Dutch?

FISHER: Me?

MOORE: Your children.

FISHER: No I don’t think so. It was trouble to [Unintelligible: 0:22:09] [laughs]. No I don’t know—it never occurred to them. No. Mm-mm.

MOORE: Why did your…How did you get in contact with Ellis Island project? The Oral History Project…how did you get in contact with us?  

FISHER: Well I must saw it advertised some place and I wrote them a letter and wrote my background. You probably read that.

MOORE: Yeah.

FISHER: Just I was just kind of interested in it you know.

MOORE: Knowing your family history?

FISHER: Knowing my family history. Mm-hmm.

MOORE: And you have a certificate from the Wall of Honor?

FISHER: Mm-hmm. Yeah I’ll probably go there next spring—April.

MOORE: And what does it mean to you then being an immigrant?

FISHER: Oh I can’t answer that I guess. I’m not ashamed of it now, and I’m proud to be an American so. I still stand up for the Star-Spangled Banner and all of that stuff of course. 

MOORE: And how and so you feel that your family felt they made a good decision coming?

FISHER: Oh mercy, yes I would think so.

MOORE: And you said that your parents—you think your parents said that—did they say that verbally to you when you were children? Or was it…

FISHER: Well when we would have company…it was a pretty nice place to live you know. Our…We had folks in Grand Rapids—that’s my mother’s sister who lived in Grand Rapids, and they would come down and visit us because they had money we couldn’t visit them. And my…you’ve got a nice place here but a big mortgage on it too but they don’t care about stuff like that you know. It was just a nice looking place and people…and we paid eleven thousand bucks for that farm—ninety acres and that was worth [Unintelligible: 0:24:04] and we sold it for how much? Seventy five hundred—same ninety and it was the depression. The boys didn’t want the farm and I didn’t want a farm. 

MOORE: So you sold that farm during the depression?

FISHER: My daddy did and would sell it I guess. See she got enough to buy a nice home in Coldwater and she’s happy for the last fifteen years I say, yeah.

MOORE: So your parents—when did your parents die?

FISHER: I don’t know. Dad died—he had a …he was over fifty-one years old I guess. I don’t know when he died. My mother died…she was I think ninety-three when she died, and [Chris] and [Daisy] had a party for ’em and they next day they’re gone… like that. 

MOORE: It must have been some party [laughs]

FISHER: Of course it was but I wasn’t there. I was working downtown. They didn’t invite me [laughs].

MOORE: Well is there anything you’d like to say at all about … or anything more you’d like to add?

FISHER: No just mighty glad I did what I did when I did. I had a good job, a nice home, a nice family. 

MOORE: Did you ever think of ever going back to Holland to live?

FISHER: No [Unintelligible: 0:25:23] wouldn’t care for it. 

MOORE: [Laughs].

Where [Unintelligible: 0:25:27]–he died too. 

MOORE: [Laughs] Okay I’d like to thank you for inviting us here for your whole family…

FISHER: Oh yeah. I anticipated this. 

MOORE: For taking time to come out and speak with you about your immigration experience, and you’re the youngest—one of the youngest we have that came over—at nine months…nine months old, and well this is Kate Moore signing off with Charles Fisher on the 5th of December, 1993 for the Ellis Island Oral History Project. 

FISHER: That is correct.

MOORE: Thank you.

FISHER: Mm-hmm.