LEVINE: Today is April 26th 1994 and I’m here today with Kaare Fornes who came through Ellis Island when he was in the Merchant Marines and was wounded in Africa. He came on a United States Army transport and that was in 1942. Mr. Fornes was born in 1919 and left Norway in 1937 to be in the Merchant Marines. This is Janet Levine for the National Parks Service and I’m here in Staten Island in Mr. and Mrs. Fornes’ home. Mrs. Fornes is here with us. Well this should be a very interesting story. I’m looking forward to hearing it.

FORNES: Okay [laughs].

LEVINE: Why don’t we start out by you giving your birthdate and where in Norway you were born?

FORNES: My birthday is 7-21-1919 and I was born in the town, little town, in Norway by the name of Rorvik. 

LEVINE: Could you spell it?

FORNES: R-O-V-I-K. But that’s…no R-O-R- yeah excuse me. R-O-R-V-I-K.

LEVINE: Okay. 

FORNES: But that’s two dots over the ‘O’ you know to make it…sounds like Rorvik. 

LEVINE: Rorvik. 

FORNES: Like you see on there you know. 

LEVINE: Oh uh-huh. Well did you live in Rorvik up until the time you left in the service?

FORNES: Yes I lived there but I went on the sailing ship like this, you call a school ship you know. It was the…you go there to learn seamanship you know and all that stuff. They get a head start line before you go out to sea. 

LEVINE: So how old were you when you went off to sea?

FORNES: Then I was sixteen years old yeah. 

LEVINE: Okay well let’s talk about your life up until the time you were sixteen. 

FORNES: Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: Do you remember…can you describe the town—what it was like when you were a boy?

FORNES: Oh yep. It was a small little town on the ….it was very nice, cozy place I will say. Everybody know each other and everybody was friendly and seemed to get along very good together, and we lived off on farming and fishing. 

LEVINE: What kind of farming?

FORNES: There was cattles you know and sheeps and whatever [laughs]…Animals. We had everything then, you know even small calves and things like that. 

LEVINE: Was your father a farmer?

FORNES: Yeah, yeah. He was…also had a farm. 

LEVINE: What was his name? 

FORNES: Alfred. Alfred Fornes. A-L-F-R-E-D. Alfred. 

LEVINE: And your mother’s name?

FORNES: It was Christine. Christine Fornes. 

LEVINE: Do you remember her maiden name?

FORNES: Yes, that was…that was Fornes too. Yeah but I tell you…let’s get this straight now. My father’s name was Sund, but then he came here and he married my mother. He got a piece of land there of his…of his…of his…

LEVINE: Father-in-law?

FORNES: Father in-law yeah.  Mm-hmm and then he took the name Fornes. 

LEVINE: Oh. 

FORNES: Yeah so he changed his name, you know. But actually when he was born his name was Sund. 

LEVINE: How do you spell that?

FORNES: S-U-N-D. Sund.

LEVINE: So was that usual that a man would take the name of…

FORNES: [Interrupts] Yes, yeah that was very…that was very usual that he took that. You know and they moved into that place where, you know, his wife was born there and everything you know, and his name was Fornes so actually he took that name over. I don’t know if he liked that name Sund enough I don’t know but anyways he switched [laughs].

LEVINE: Now would he have done that legally or he just started using Fornes?

FORNES: I don’t know if he had to go through any kind of paperwork. I really don’t know but I don’t think so. I know the farmer next to us there, he was pretty mad because the postman gets mixed up once in a while because his name was Fornes too [laughs]. So sometimes my father’s letters went over there and he opened it up and there were a little friction there about that you know [laughs].

LEVINE: Well now was that Fornes related to you?

FORNES: Oh no. No, no, no, no. That was just…he picked the name I guess you know it was particular at the time I guess. As long as they had a name that was good enough for them you know [laughs]. 

LEVINE: Did you have grandparents?

FORNES: Oh yeah. Yeah, yeah they lived…they lived in the house next to us. Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: So this was your mother’s parents?

FORNES: That was my mother’s parents yes. 

LEVINE: And do you remember their names?

FORNES: Oh yeah there’s [Wilda] and Hans was the…H-A-N-S Hans was one and the other was Wilda. Oh I have to spell that again. If you get me a piece of paper. 

LEVINE: Well maybe when we’re finished. 

FORNES: Okay mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: So what do you remember about your grandfather?

FORNES: Well uh I was young. But he was…he was a fishing you know fishing and farming too, you know. 

LEVINE: So was the town… the town was a seaport?

FORNES: Oh yeah, yeah ships come in there yeah. Mm-hmm. Yeah but it wasn’t nothing such a big capacity. It was a small little place, and it was on the island as a matter of fact. 

LEVINE: Oh. 

FORNES: You know, yeah. There was the island so then they have the ferryboat going across but of course you have a bridge now so. 

LEVINE: Did the island have a name?

FORNES: Vikna. Yeah Vikna. V-I-K-N-A. Vikna—that was the name of it. 

LEVINE: Now did you ever do any things with your grandfather? Did you ever go places?

FORNES: Yes I did. I helped him to paint boats and I stirred the paint for him when I was a kid, you know. I helped him out as much as I could, and he was very nice. He used to take us and put us on his lap and sit and tell some stories. I’m telling you it was dark and we didn’t have no electricity or anything and you’re sitting there rooms there with a kerosene lamp you know and listening to those war stories he was telling us. So that scared the heck out of me and my brother—my youngest brother. There’s only two years between us. So we were like together you know. He was telling some terrific stories there [laughs].

LEVINE: What do you remember about the stories? Do you remember any?

FORNES: No he was talking about wild fishes and [Unintelligible: 0:07:35] all that stuff like a [Unintelligible: 0:07:37] used to walk on land you know before you know and feed you know [laughs] and then but all kinds of trolls and things you know, and there’s…you know he really scared the heck out of us. That’s why I’m still scared of the dark today [laughs].

LEVINE: What kind of a man was your grandfather? 

FORNES: He was a very nice man—very, very nice. He lost his father out to sea—my grandfather—but he was very, very nice man; he would never holler and he was very nice and quiet and just did his job and that’s all. So was the grandmother—very, very nice. As a matter of fact it was my grandmother who teach me how to read, she used to go to her house you know, which was only a few steps away from the house I lived in. So there…so we…she was sitting and knitting and learning me how to spell you know when I was young. You know here they have this thing where you start in school when you’re very young right? Over there you had to learn out of the home; you didn’t start school before you were seven.

LEVINE: I see. So did she…would she help you to read like with a book?

FORNES: Yeah with a book, and then she spelled it and then pronounced it like you know. That’s the way she went. And I have to do the same thing and follow her you know and kept on going like that. And I think it was a good thing because the teacher—he was a very old man—and he was just sitting there writing letters, and I don’t know what kind of letters he was writing. But he wasn’t much of a teacher for us; there was a lot of complaints about that. I used to many, many years ago so I guess I can say it now [laughs]. 

LEVINE: How about your mother’s…that was your mother’s mother, I’m sorry. How about your father’s mother and father—did you know them? 

FORNES: Yes but they I’ll tell you, they died when I was very young. I remember we went there for Christmas you know for…we always get together on Christmas time. I remember that …that was…he wanted to like…we had to take a boat to get over to that land, like you know [Unintelligible: 0:09:56] to his house. So I remember that but not too much…not too much about him, other than having some Christmas goodies, you know.

LEVINE: What was Christmas like when you were little?

FORNES: Oh it was very nice, very nice. Yeah. That was um…we had parties at home with Christmas trees, and then the whole gang would get together like you know and we’d walk around the Christmas tree in our own homes singing you know, and there was plenty of good food. You know they did all the baking themselves. You know you had to do that over there, you didn’t have that much money to buy stuff for. So they did all the baking and do all the things like that so there was plenty of that stuff. So Christmas was very, very, it was much longer than it over here too. Yeah you have to celebrate practically all month! [laughs] But at least you have three holidays like you know. See over here you have Christmas day and then you’re finished, right? No you have two after that over there. 

LEVINE: Oh, what are the other two?

FORNES: Well they call it [sect] you know two on Christmas days you know. 

LEVINE: And so would there be any exchange of gifts the way we do it?

FORNES: Oh yeah. Exactly the same thing, yeah. And when we had a little money they’d buy us small things you know and we did that we did Christmas Eve. We opened them up. 

LEVINE: Did you have a Christmas tree? 

FORNES: Oh yeah! Yeah, yeah, yeah. But we had candles we didn’t have electric lights on it [laughs]. We had candles [laughs]!

LEVINE: You had real candles on it?

FORNES: Yeah you know like candles you see here. You know they’re wax candles you know, and [Steve] can’t understand how the house didn’t burn down. Because you know it fell over and this and that but nothing happened like that, as far as I know, you know. 

LEVINE: Did you have other decorations on the tree as well? 

FORNES: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. We had same as here, oh yeah. We put on the tinsels and balls and you know things like that. Yeah 

LEVINE: Were you a religious family? 

FORNES: Yeah my father was and yeah my mother too. Yeah. Mm-hmm. Oh yes. Oh yeah. They were a…they were a…he…My father—he always made sure that every Saturday evening—that we all went together in the house, and they read a little bit from the bible, and we sung tighter, and then he said a prayer, yeah. That was all that… that was sure is [Unintelligible: 0:12:51] church you know so that always happened so that was a good home that I came from you know.

LEVINE: What…what religion?

FORNES: Protestant. 

LEVINE: Protestant. What denomination? What kind of Protestant? Lutheran?

FORNES: Lutheran, yeah. Lutheran, yeah. Mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: So do you remember any religions occasions—any ways that you observed?

FORNES: Yes we had this guy who was traveling around from farm to farm. He hold you know meetings you know, you know—the farmers know all around. And he’s coming here and coming in a couple of hours and gathering together and he sing the prayer and things like that, and then he [Unintelligible: 0:13:44]…in the homes on the…then he had to sleep over that night you know, and then he went to another place like you know from place to place like that to preach God’s word you know. To get to it in that way. 

LEVINE: So he was like a traveling minister?

FORNES: Yeah, that’s what he was, yeah.

LEVINE: You…Did you have a church in your town?

FORNES: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Mm-hmm. We had church too. 

LEVINE: And was there a minister in that church?

FORNES: Oh yeah, mm-hmm. Mm-hmm yeah we had two churches that I’m thinking of. Could afford to have more than priest you know [laughs].

LEVINE: So in other words was there any difference between what you would do in someone’s home when the traveling minister came and what would be done when you went to church? 

FORNES: No he…he was just preaching God’s word, you know for a couple of hours there, and then uh we always… my mother she always served coffee and cake, you know, and for all of the peoples who came you know. On the…oh you know sit around and kill some time, that was it you know. 

LEVINE: And you mother—what kind of a person was she?

FORNES: She was a…she was a swell woman believe you me. I’m telling you, I wish all mothers was like that. She never…always made sure we had the best we could get, and what she could afford you know, and always looked after us and all that stuff so they was a very good mother I would say. And that was out… didn’t here from me for five years you know. The work you know I couldn’t get back home; the German occupied Norway, and I couldn’t spend it out…so we couldn’t write letters or nothing. She said it was the worst five years she ever had you know. It was very, very sad. But it was sad for me too you know. I didn’t know. I thought maybe somebody would…you know. 

LEVINE: So you were the oldest child?

FORNES: No, no, no. I got…I got three brothers all older than me, and a sister, and then I have one brother younger than me. So there were six of us all together.

LEVINE: What were your brothers’ and sister’s names? So start at the oldest.

FORNES: Yeah there was my sister. She…Her name was [Oespierk]. Oespierk. Yeah that’s a little [laughs]

LEVINE: O-S?

FORNES: Huh?

LEVINE: How do you spell that?

FORNES: You spell that O-E…Hilda will get me a paper. 

LEVINE: Maybe we’ll get the spelling…

FORNES: [Interrupts] Yeah all right we’ll get all the spelling, and then I had my oldest brother and his name was [Sigur], and then I had the third one who was [Arne] and then there was Harold and then there was me (Kaare), and then there was [Raina.] That was all. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Who were you closest to in the family?

FORNES: I’d say we get along very good together, all of us, yeah. There was no difference between either one of us, no. We were a very close-knit family I would say. 

LEVINE: Yeah. 

FORNES: Matter of fact. He didn’t [Unintelligible: 0:17:02] even be able to see they say you stay like the rest of us you know. I said well somebody needed to fly out, and I did it. 

LEVINE: Do you know why you wanted to go out to sea?

FORNES: I don’t know. I always liked the sea. I did, yeah, and I always liked to be on boats and things like that. And the little you know they have fishing you know vessels—my brothers and my father—on the small things you know. So I figure if they’re going to be on a boat then might as well try something big, which I did. And when I went out they get one of the biggest ships in Europe in ’37, you know. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Well that’s good. Lets finish talking about before you left. What…do you remember any dishes that your mother or your grandmother cooked that you used to like when you were a little boy?

FORNES: [Laughs] Well I always like [frozen] fruit I think—I liked that—and rice pudding; I always liked that. And we had…we used a lot of fish you know. We fished ourselves so we get that cheap you know out of the water.

LEVINE: What kind of fish?

FORNES: There was carp fish and trout and salmon, which is a lot of that around there where we were born. There was a lot of salmon you know—that was good stuff. And what it was…everything was…I tell you it was good, healthy food what they gave us. Then he had this here…what you grew…what you grew on your farm you know that you…uh…corn you know…corn on the farm, and then you ground that up, take it to the mill and have it ground up, and it’s this little brownish cereal like you know, and you make like a cereal out of that, and I tell you that really is good stuff because it comes right…well you know the fishing thing…[Unintelligible: 0:19:14] I don’t think there was too much fat in it either I don’t think like that…the real [McCoy] I would say. So the food they gave us that was… and I tell you that’s why I think those [squares] would live a little longer too—they had good health. Yeah I would say yeah, they come from a good stuff. They don’t eat Burger King and this stuff all the time. I think it was better the way we lived.

LEVINE: How about your father. What was he like?

FORNES: He was a very, very nice man yeah. He did…he did everything that he could for us too, you know and always cared for us and always looked after us so. He was the best I would say.

LEVINE: Did you ever go with him places?

FORNES: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Yeah when we…you see in the winter time in January, February, March and April its the big carp fish season over there, and then I was in school—it was Easter, Easter vacation, right for us—he took me to the fishing village there. And he took me on a boat—it was a motorboat you know—and he had me in the [wheel] house all the time because you know he didn’t want to have me on deck because I could be washed overboard you know. So he had his eye on me all the time there. He was a good man. 

LEVINE: So you went to school when you were seven?

FORNES: Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: And did you stay in school up until you were sixteen?

FORNES: Oh yeah, yeah. Mm-hmm. Sure and then you had to get out and make up for your mind what you want to do [laughs].

LEVINE: Is there anything about school that stands out in your mind?

FORNES: No I went to the public school, which we all do. I guess its so…I wouldn’t say this quite so much as the high school over here though oh no. You couldn’t get that much into your head in such a short term [laughs]. But I took some navigation course you know, and then I went over here and that was a…that was a tough school believe you me. You had to go to the teacher everyday, and they gave you so much lectures for the day you know. If you went to the teacher there and say I’m going to see if you made it to study, you know what they did to you? They didn’t let you go to shore.  You had to stay on a boat [laughs] and that was the punishment! 

LEVINE: You mean when you took the navigation course you were on the boat?

FORNES: Yeah, oh yeah, yeah. 

LEVINE: Uh huh.

FORNES: Yeah, yeah. You learned more than that you learned everything, even ropes course, which I do because here they make those things around here. And you learned little different…all types of different things, you know. 

LEVINE: So did you start that before you were sixteen?

FORNES: No, no. 

LEVINE: When you were sixteen?

FORNES: Yeah when I get out yeah you had to. Yeah there was…there was a whole day…a twelve-hour day—work day over there. Then we went out sailing. We went to England, we went to Denmark you know and we had to rig it there–you know climb on the mast still and cut it, huh. It was a little rough there when you were that young. And it was loose before they fall overboard right? [laughs]

LEVINE: Now is there another name for that kind of ship besides a sailing ship?

FORNES: No it was a school-ship…a school-ship. 

LEVINE: Uh huh a school-ship. So how long did you have that course? 

FORNES: Six months there and then you go to sea. Matter fact at that time in ’37 there was a lousy for work or so you know, and if you didn’t have that you couldn’t even…you couldn’t even get a job on the ship because there the [ABs], they were you know…you know what ABs is oh you probably don’t—then they were some working guys on the ship you know to do all of the heavy work, you know. They called them ABs you know over here. They had a…had a mate license, a captain license, and everything but the other sailors were the ordinary working man on the ship because there were too many of them and it was tough to get a job you know. 

LEVINE: So you took that course in order to get a job? 

FORNES: Yeah.

LEVINE: But then what…then?

FORNES: Then you go up and get more and more experience and then when you get you …when you get all your timing I think it was about three years experience before you could go to mate school to be a mate. Then you go to school…they you go to school every year again and then you get a mate license, and then you will sail for a year or two …before you go for a captain’s license. 

LEVINE: Did you go for it?

FORNES: No, no, no I didn’t go that high up, no. No they…I had application in and everything to go there but then war and the Germans took over the country so I didn’t get home to do it.. 

LEVINE: Okay so tell me how the war affected you. Where were you when you went into the war? And when you were…were you drafted?

FORNES: No. No, I was already in it. I was in it from the first date before this country came into it. It was in 1940 you know when Germany went into Poland and started in Europe there. I was in it then—right then—right from the first day. And we went [Unintelligible: 0:25:05] in France, if you know where that is. I don’t know. You don’t remember the English and the French and they were chased out of there and they needed to get back to England. And we were in that port there for a little while and the Germans were not far from taking that port there. And we said to heck with this we want to go home to Norway. So the captain says you can’t go home, so here comes the Norwegian counselor on board and a bunch of French soldiers on board and he says get out, that’s all. So we didn’t like that you know. But we went out there and had to go, there was no other way out…get out the English Channel or else they start torpedo over, you know already. You feel a blast on the…we didn’t get torpedo but we went down to it on the sail though. We sailed to America there. We had to wait for orders from Norway for what to do, so we waited there about two weeks waiting for orders for everything to get organized, and then the Germans come into Norway you know. They went all over you know [laughs]. So then…so then everything was broken up…then…in England the government managed to get themselves out of Norway. So they went to England so we could correspond that way you know through England. But Norway was completely there was…sealed you know due to the Germans who occupied it there. So uh then we were… start sailing then; yeah we sailed. We had to load them to pick up and load there, yeah and sail, and then we went…I can’t really remember where we went to but just keep on sailing there from port to port you know, and doing that. But my worst trip was to [Unintelligible: 0:27:08] up to…up to Russia. You probably hear about that—that was very, very…they call them suicide trips you know—and of course so many ships went down because see we had Norway then, and the planes—they were stationed in Norway—they flew out there to take them…to hit us, and they hit us or they’d run back to Norway and get more bombs and things like that, and then out again you know. That’s why they get a certificate from [Yarleston] there; they get a medal from Russia too. Yeah. And that was…that was a very sad trip…a very, very sad trip. Out of thirty-seven ships, there was only eleven of us that made it through the town. The rest was done. That was very sad to see all of those people been killed you know. So and as a matter of fact I’m even invited to go to [Unintelligible: 0:28:01] this summer here, yeah. They want me to come there; they just pay my fare over there and then they’ll take us around, and see the whole Russia there, and I would like to go but she can’t fly so I have to stay here. So I can’t go [laughs].

LEVINE: Maybe you can by ship. 

FORNES: Ah no. No. I guess it could be some way to get there but it’s the twenty-sixth of June. They’re going to take us to Moscow…oh to…they’re going to take us to…they could even go take us on the ice breaker, [laughs] the biggest one in the world and there’s [Unintelligible: 0:28:43] driven. I’m anxious to go on that [laughs]. That’ll take a little cruise on that one [laughs]. And then they’re going to…there was a hundred-some merchant seamen was killed you know on the stretch there and there’s a cemetery there; it was…they buried…enormous…American seamen, and they’re going to take us there for some ceremony there for that. But it would be an eleven day trip…as a matter of fact they…I think I have something [Mumbles at 0:29:15]

LEVINE: Okay well let’s wait until we finish.

FORNES: Yeah okay, all right, okay mm-hmm.

LEVINE: Now uh tell me about…so then when were you sent to Africa? 

FORNES: Oh we loaded here in New York and we went down to Africa it was invasion in Casablanca. But then we didn’t go to Casablanca we went into Iraq, and they landed there, and we had all the ammunition on the…on the ship. That was all you know of course you needed ammunition as soldiers you know. And there was a …he came in there and then there… were the Germans you know, and they had Sicily then and Italy then you know. So it was hard to fly there from Sicily into Iran you know, and on day one bomb them like hell you know and the ship got hit, and blown, and I broke my hip here, so then I wind up in the hospital there in Iran. To get the…where there are a bunch of soldiers there you know so some in [Patton’s] army. You know Patton? You probably heard of him?  Well they were in army there with him you know and he says the first one they’re going to kill was Patton because this guy’s crazy and went to hell up there. There was a hill that they had to take and they lost eighteen hundred men, they used to get food by the French there you know. They…they’re supposed to…you know… some agency...fish out everything you know, and what’s going behind the front line, well the French they lied to him and said ah the German is nothing over here, just come on, come on, come on, and Americans marched on, and they ran into a trap there and they were killed. This is what the guys in the hospital told me. He was hurt here, the leg shot off, arms, and shot through the head; it was a terrible ordeal. But I tell you there you hear the true stories from those guys, somebody who really been in the front line you know. And they will tell you the most, really, really sad stories there. I will never forget this one kid there. He lay next to me. So he came in from the operation room, you know, and he lay next to me there. And he said ‘why did they do it? Why did they do it? So I said ‘what did they do?’ He said ‘why did they do it?’ he kept on saying ‘why did they do it?’ he was too young to be drafted so he lied on his age, and then the poor guy got his leg shot off, so that’s the way…that’s the way it was. 

LEVINE: So then after you were wounded in the hip, what happened to you?

FORNES: Well then I…then I…they took me to the hospital on then they was operating on my—put three nails in there. They nail it together here. And this here I’m telling you this would do it in there right…I was laying there, on the table there, and I didn’t even know how I get to the hospital because I was unconscious there and I came on and off you know. But the soldiers were watching me there because the doctors and nurses and everybody was in the bomb shelter, and they were bombing you know, and by the time they were finished with that then they came up, you know and they started working on me. And then they…they had to operate on me because there was a [clamp] on the fracture—the bone was sticking out through the hip, to the skin here, so then they nailed that together there, and I was there…they had a cast from here and all the way to the toes in one hundred ten degrees. 

LEVINE: Mm. Full body cast?

FORNES: Yeah Full body cast, and then it was open down here a little and then I was there …it must be a month and a half I guess, you know. So then they…then they figured they had to you know start sending them back to the states you know because there in Africa there’s not enough hospitals to take care of all of the people. But they did; they took the best homes and they moved the people out on the… they made them…to take care of the soldiers you know. But that’s one thing I would say that I would never forget those nurses and the doctors. They stood on the job and they were true blue I’m telling you; they were good. They worked very hard. Yeah and then it was time for me to be sent back you know. 

LEVINE: To Norway?

FORNES: No to…to the States you know. 

LEVINE: To the States. 

FORNES: Of course they kept on sending people back—some wounded soldiers and prisoners too. We had three hundred prisoners on the ship. You remember the prisoners? On the…on the five hundred wounded soldiers, some were slain down below deck, and they couldn’t get out of there if they get torpedo. I felt sorry for them. But I was on crutches then; I could walk around on crutches, and as soon as we get into…get close to the [Unintelligible: 0:34:47]…there because there’s a lot of submarines staying around there its so narrow and they have a chance to do some torpedo there you know. On the…because the mountain there they claimed, I don’t know how true it is or not but there was like this underneath where the submarine is hiding in there so they couldn’t get [uninterrupted] [Unintelligible: 0:35:07] will get them that way you know. So they were there the Germans took them back…so they were really torpedo like crazy there, and I’ll never forget they were standing on deck there and I see was an American destroyer that came speeding around us…around the back of us, and coming on the side of us like this. And here he get it…and he get it right in the [magazine], and tell that everything was left on the smokes, and nothing was left, and there was about two hundred and fifty men on the boats there and thank God that…you know it’s a shame like the other take...or we should have had that probably was [Unintelligible: 0:35:50] but he…he took it; it was not done on purpose or anything. I don’t think somebody else actually happened; he was changing his position around so he was just in a spot there…and

LEVINE: You mean he was fired upon?

FORNES: Yeah. Yeah they were shooting the torpedoes at the submarine, yeah. Yeah, and we would have had it then we had three hundred Germans on board and five of the soldiers. 

LEVINE: Could you communicate with the Germans? Could you talk with them?

FORNES: Well there was a lot of American doctors and they were…they were speaking German and things like that, oh yeah. As a matter of fact a man was standing there one day because he lined…oh excuse me…said he lined them up everyday you know; they lined them up on deck and get them here; oh they’re out of work too; they carry [Unintelligible: 0:36:39] and things like that too but it was plenty of piece around you know—who were watching them so, you know and they couldn’t get away with anything. And uh…and the…and the…he was saying that the German guy he was saying that the…yeah he was saying something in German so the American doctor was standing there he says ‘do you understand German?’ and he said ‘no,’ and he said… ‘do you know what he said? He said ‘I hope the German battleship come here and take over the convoy.’ [Laughs] You know they were hoping for everything I guess you know. But they came back to the States here, and he had a hell of a lot better than being in the army…German army down in Africa there because they took good care of him over here. 

LEVINE: These were all German army?

FORNES: Oh yeah captain. Captain army, yeah…Yeah.

LEVINE: So then you came into the New York harbor?

FORNES: Right.

LEVINE: Well why don’t you name the ship you were on.

FORNES: Oh [Shorne]. Shorne. Mm-hmm. Oh yeah I will never forget that name, yeah. But there was another thing that happened too but maybe I shouldn’t tell you [laughs]!  

LEVINE: No go ahead.

FORNES: Well you can always take it out you know. Its really funny what happened see when you know our human service, everybody has to do something you know…and…empty ash trays or take temperature of the soldiers or sick people you know or you wash dishes or whatever, you know. So I was on crutches and then we had sixteen nurses on board, but they were pregnant—they were sent back to the States because they couldn’t take the war down there no more; it was too much. A lot of people couldn’t take it and a lot of soldiers couldn’t take it either; they shot themselves in the foot you know to get the heck out of there. So it was a beautiful sunny day you know, and the nurses was taking a sunbath…a sunbath…but uh…what do you heck you call it?...laying out when you’re in the sun, right?

LEVINE: Uh huh.

FORNES: So the transportation major he asked me. He says you know…he told me first, this was before the thing. He said we have sixteen pregnant nurses on board here. He says, can you keep an eye on them and if you see something goes on; he says let me know. I said sure, yeah. So I lay down there too and take a little sunbath out there you know, and here he comes and said oh no. he says you’re getting too familiar with them and you’re getting to close to them He said I’ve got another job for you. I said okay. He said peel potatoes because the machine broke down to peel potatoes, and you know we need a hell of a lot of potatoes for all those people out there [laughs]. So I said okay sure. Sure I’ll go along on that [laughs]. So there are five of us sitting down below there and peeling potatoes, and there’s a prisoner sitting in front of me, and he said if it wasn’t for you I wouldn’t be here [laughs]. So I was…it was the first time I ever get fired from a job [laughs]. But this is…this is true you know, and of course we came up here you know to New York and the immigration comes on board. I go through a lot of guys and I’m breaking my rule you know. So here of course my papers there, they lost that. My doctors’ papers they had all had it…they had nothing on me and the doctors papers didn’t happen to me and then they come up here and the immigration didn’t know who the heck I was, and the name Sigmund…was a name they…they…they didn’t like because its…they said that’s German, and most likely you’re a German spy. 

LEVINE: That’s your middle name?

FORNES: Yeah Sigmund [laughs]. So I said Jesus Christ almighty and the transportation major—he even—immigration you know, he was talking to so he came over, and he’s in charge of all the soldiers and all of the women on the ship. So he came over to immigration and says no, he said I know foreigners and he said…that was practically a month ago to come up from Africa because there was so much [Unintelligible: 0:41:16] you know and things you know. So…so then he says he is here to do the same as all the rest of us, he says. Its not that he’s…whatever he asks him to do, he says he never refused, yeah…then got nice with immigration he said. If you have no papers, Ellis Island, that’s it. So they took me to Ellis Island, after me going through all of that thing down there, I go yeah I’m on top of it—I’m coming here![laughs].

LEVINE: Tell me your impression of Ellis Island when you first got here. 

FORNES: Well I tell you I make friends wherever I go, and I make the best of it. So I wouldn’t say it was bad, you know. I wind up there in the passenger chair section like with all the passengers people you know, the Germans, you know. And I guess they had music there and you could dance with them and that’s it, you know. So it was…they were decent people you know, and of course you were all decent and some sailors and picked up and still to leave and all that stuff. And then immigration picked them up here too; you either go to sea or go to jail, and some of them didn’t want to go to sea so then you wind up over there. 

LEVINE: Were there women there too on Ellis Island or was there…?

FORNES: [Interrupts] Yeah, yeah, yeah. There were beautiful girls there—blonde Germans there, girls there.  

LEVINE: Oh but because they were prisoners of war?

FORNES: Yeah that’s right, yeah, mm-hmm and that was the…okay then they had a doctor there right on Ellis Island. So they put me in the hospital there because this thing here never healed up and they couldn’t figure out what the hell it was. So then …then the doctors as well, he says it doesn’t matter if you are German spy or not; they said you need better doctor treatment than what I can get…give you...give…give me. So he said you got to go to Staten Island to the hospital there, so I said you can send me wherever the hell you want because this here had never healed up after operation that long took there you know… and …he took me over to Ellis Island…I mean to Staten Island, and then he operated on me here and he find a washing here, a piece of rag in here. They forget to take it out down in Africa there, you know[laughs].

LEVINE: So then were you sent back to Ellis Island? 

FORNES: No so then they operated on me there and took it out, and it healed up right away but going with something like that in your leg for so long time, and laying in that, turn off the heat, but it cast off like that…you can get an infection. [Phone rings in background] So you see that that fish and the farming there…something helped along the way heh? [laughs].

LEVINE: Uh wait. 

FORNES: Hey man. 

LEVINE: Maybe we can pause here.

LEVINE: Okay we are resuming now from a phone call from your nephew from Singapore. 

FORNES: Yeah, yeah [laughs] okay.

LEVINE: Okay so you had this rag taken out of your operation place, and then it healed up and you stayed on Staten Island? 

FORNES: No. Then I figured I don’t know…I…that Shorne, the boat we came on—they have doctors on board you know. So I didn’t trust it here so much. So I figured I better take a ship with a doctor on board. So okay we did that and we went to Liverpool in England. 

LEVINE: [Interrupts] But were you…were you able to leave Ellis Island? 

FORNES: Yeah so fifteen days and I was back on duty. 

LEVINE: What happened? I mean as far as your getting cleaned up, as far as who you were, and all the reasons why you were sent to Ellis Island, did that all get taken care of? They found out who you were and?

FORNES: Oh yeah they find the papers. They find the papers, yeah. They find the papers there. Of course it was chaos almost you know, and you know on the ship with all those people there. I guess the papers get lost in that shuffle there, so…so then they find the papers and then everything was okay. 

LEVINE: Well tell me, you were at Ellis Island in 1942. Right?

FORNES: Yeah. 

LEVINE: What was it like then? Were there a lot of people there? 

FORNES: Oh yeah! Mm-hmm. Yeah.

LEVINE: What…can you say anything about what Ellis Island was like during that period?

FORNES: No I think that was a cozy place is one way to look at it. You met all kinds of people there. I’ll never forget it was a Swede I met there; he was a sailor but he turned [cocoa] from the war I guess you know. So he asked me one time, he says so how do you sleep at night? I said oh I sleep all right. He says I cant sleep; I get all the small white dogs coming running on my pillow all night long he says, you know and he says ‘I’m going to send one of my ships, he says, down to Argentina to pick up some coffee because Sweden doesn’t have enough coffee [laughs]. So you met all kinds of people, you know, hopeful you know, and I guess…I guess its tough out there and if you are one of those that can’t take it…something happened to you. So that’s the way it was. 

LEVINE: So…so then you took the ship that went…you went back on the Shorne, and you went to live…

FORNES: Yeah, yeah then we had it loaded with soldiers on board, and take them all to England, and then on the way back from Liverpool, the pins came loose. Yeah. So the doctor on the ship, he says ‘no, he says’ stay in bed and you’ll go to the hospital when you…when you come to the states. So they took me to the marine hospital again and operated, and took the pins out. So then they have the pins but because the hole feels something loose together again you know. So…then…but that took some time. I think that took a month don’t you before I was back to work then again, you know? 

LEVINE: So you went…in other words you went right back into the coast?

FORNES: [Coughs] What?

LEVINE: The coastguard or into the…

FORNES: Merchant marine.

LEVINE: Merchant marines rather, and you went right back on duty after …after you were operated on? 

FORNES: Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah I can’t imagine what else…[Coughs].

LEVINE: So let’s see. 

FORNES: [Coughs] I’m sorry. 

LEVINE: That’s okay. And then how about then until the rest of the war or through the remainder of the war? 

FORNES: Yeah [coughs]…you know I kept on sailing all the way through and made a few trips up to [0:48:58] there and all that stuff there. [Coughs] I get a [salutation] from three countries there: from Norway, [Unintelligible: 0:49:08] and [U.S.A?]. So I kept on sailing got to have proof, you know papers out there 

LEVINE: Can we pause for a minute? 

FORNES: Yeah all right. 

LEVINE: Okay so you were saying then that you resumed active duty after you…

FORNES: Yeah after I had the pins taken out yeah mm-hmm, and then that lasted me to ’59 I worked without, and then I had an artificial hip. You know I was worn out you know. It was a painful month. So I then I had them put in a new…they messed that up too—that didn’t come out right either, so. 

LEVINE: Is there anything else about your career during the war—World War II that you would mention…that you would like to mention? 

FORNES: Well yes, during the war, yeah. Well they came to [Unintelligible: 0:50:11] right and it was a very sad trip, so we figured we’d go to shore and there was snow up to your knees you know and so me on the oiler on the ship, and we go and take it to the shore there, and we get lost because it was snowing…it was snowing and blowing there and you couldn’t see where you was going. You know it wasn’t much of a town that time. Anyway, and then all of a sudden there was bayonet in the back. There were Russian soldiers there because they had been bombing the town, and they told me Germans…had parachute troopers, so they figured they’d get rid of us. So they kept on marching in that snow until we come to outside of town there, and they took us into shed, and we thought they would shoot us you know. So no, they didn’t do that; they started searching us and they find all the chewing gum, candy, and cigarettes, you know. Because you always loaded up with that and then gave it to people on shore because they didn’t have that much there. So they took that but then they disappeared and me and the boy was waiting there, thinking they would come back again. They didn’t come back, no, and then we start walking and walking and in that it was like a hurricane blew and you couldn’t see nothing, and thank God we took the right course and came to the town and we came to a place that was a tiny little light you know. So then we walked up to that and then we said oh this is a house and must be a town, and then we walked and walked and we saw more and more dim light—very dim light.  We walked and I think it was about five o’clock in the morning when we came aboard on the ship. We walked in that snow there.

LEVINE: How long had you walked?

FORNES: Well I’ll tell you from…well we must have walked there for Christ almighty for about six- seven- eight hours.

LEVINE: Wow. 

FORNES: Yeah in that snow. Naturally we walked with our hands up for a long while when they had us you know. And then when we came aboard and we told the cops what happened, and he says okay go to bed, and so we do. But in [Unintelligible: 0:52:43] there, they had a place called the American club and there…you could only go up there and have one drink; that’s all they gave you. They said you’re not going to have this Americans drunk because they’re crazy anyways Americans [laughs]. And we could go to no place…they wouldn’t let us into any place except the Post Office. Did you have to used to go into Post Office? [laughs]. That’s what they tried to make of us now…the shows are on now…so anyway so then that was all the fun we had there after going through that trip there and going up there. You probably read about the [Unintelligible: 0:53:29] trip; it was the most tensions trips there was…to go there…there was so many American seamen was killed, it was unbelievable—they have a cemetery there for them. 

LEVINE: Well thinking of all of your war experiences and looking back on them now. Is there any kind of truth or any kind of philosophy that you draw from…from having served in that place?

FORNES: No I’ll tell you sometimes it reflects me in some different ways you know. It does that because there was…we saw a heck of lot to see people getting killed every night and boats going down and things like that. It was very, very sad. But…like me…I’m a different guy. I’m a happy go lucky guy in a lot of ways, so I don’t take things so hard…too hard like a lot of other people does, you know. We had people jump over board who couldn’t take it, and you know it was rough time. But you have to make up your mind if you’re going to go through it and that’s it and make the best of it.

LEVINE: Are there any aspects of having been in the war that particularly stay with you?

FORNES: I have very hard for sleeping. I think that has something to do with it; they say…the doctor says it has something to do with it.  Because there you know you have…you get every…every five minutes you know the bell goes off you know, and you have to run out there, and you go asleep with all the clothes on you and have the life preserver in your arm. There’s nothing good night sleep you get that way, and so actually there is a lot of drawback, you know yeah, but I’m one of the lucky ones—let’s put it that way. 

LEVINE: So thinking back about you know you starting out in Norway and then emigrating eventually to this country…do you think that that’s affected you—the fact that you changed countries? 

FORNES: No. 

LEVINE: Made a difference in you as a person? 

FORNES: No, no. I love this country yeah believe you me. I love Norway too. I go to Norway every other year to see my people. But I tell you this is the country believe you me. I love it. Believe you me. 

LEVINE: Are there certain aspects that you have that you consider Norwegian and certain aspects of you that you consider American? 

FORNES: No I consider myself American all the way because I like this country here. I fought for it and I love it and it was well worth fighting for believe you me. It’s a good country and people if you don’t like it then you can get the hell out [laughs]. That’s my idea about it. 

LEVINE: Is there anything else that you can think of that you want to say…perhaps what it is that you’re most proud of having done in your life?

FORNES: Well I got married and I have two kids and I’m very proud of that. 

LEVINE: Why don’t you mention your wife’s name and her maiden name?

FORNES: Her maiden name is…her maiden name is [Silma Sedegreen], and then…then no her name is [Silma] Fornes.

LEVINE: And your children’s names? 

FORNES: The [Stilwun] Fornes. I mean this is mine on my weekly and then its Robert. My son is Robert Fornes. 

LEVINE: And you have grandchildren? 

FORNES: Mm-hmm. I have four. There’s Robert Fornes, then there’s Evan, then there’s Barrett, and then there’s Steven. 

LEVINE: And is there anything else you’d like to say before we close?

FORNES: No, no I think I’ve said too much already [laughs].

LEVINE: [laughs]. Okay. Well I want to say you’ve said very interesting things, and its been a pleasure to talk with you, and I’m glad that we’re going to have this tape now as part of the Ellis Island Museum collection. I want to thank you very much. I’ve been talking with Kaare Fornes who came through Ellis Island as a wounded Merchant Marine. 

FORNES: Mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: In 1942. And this is Janet Levine and I’m here in Staten Island at Mr. and Mrs. Fornes’ home, and its April 25th…no 26th, 1994 and I’m signing off.