LEVINE: [Recording begins mid sentence] 6th 1995 and I’m here in Hooksett, New Hampshire with Mrs. Athena Garos, who was born in the United States in 1918 and then went to Greece in 1927 and stayed in Greece for a few years, returning with her mother, father, and brother in 1930. Today Mrs. Garos is seventy-seven years of age. I want to thank you very much and I’m really looking forward to whatever you can remember about…I’ll ask the questions and then you can just tell me what you know…

GAROS: [Interrupts] Should I talk now?

LEVINE: I’ll start okay. 

GAROS:  Yeah. 

LEVINE: If you would say for the tape where…your birthdate. 

GAROS: My birthdate October 19th 1918. 

LEVINE: Okay and where did you live in the United States after you were born here? 

GAROS: In Manchester. 

LEVINE: In Manchester. So you were born in Manchester and stayed in Manchester…

GAROS: Right, right. 

LEVINE: …until you left for Greece.

GAROS: Yes. 

LEVINE: Now do you have any early memories of your life in Manchester before you went to Greece as a little girl?

GAROS: Well…I went to Greek school here before we went to Greece, and I went to [main] school and public school.

LEVINE: And when you say Greek school, how was that school different from the public school?

GAROS: Oh we went there in the afternoon—after school—it wasn’t a whole day, just about a few hours a day…a week rather not all day.

LEVINE: A few hours a week you went to Greek school?

GAROS: Mm-hmm. Greek school.

LEVINE: And there you learned Greek is that…? 

GAROS: Right and we always talked Greek at the house anyway. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: So everything was…it wasn’t complicated at all because you know I knew both languages so. 

LEVINE: Yeah now had your mother and father come from Greece?

GAROS: Yes. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: They both came from Greece. My father came first and my mother came later, and she married my father here. 

LEVINE: I see. What was your father’s name? 

GAROS: Spiros. S-P-I-R-O-S.

LEVINE: Okay and your mother’s name? 

GAROS: Martha. 

LEVINE: And her maiden name? 

GAROS: I better write it for you. 

LEVINE: Okay why don’t you write it down.

GAROS: So it will be easier for you. 

LEVINE: Okay…[paper rustles] okay and how do you pronounce your mother’s name?

GAROS: Karaoulis—her last name. 

LEVINE: Karaoulis. K-A-R-A-O-U-L-I-S.

GAROS: …I-S.

LEVINE: And did you have brothers and sisters when you were in the United States before you left for Greece?

GAROS: All I had was that one brother. 

LEVINE: And how old was he?

GAROS: He was younger than me; he was born in 1921.

LEVINE: Okay and his name? 

GAROS: Aristotle.

LEVINE: Aristotle okay…okay be careful you’ve got the uh [rustling noises at 0:02:51]…just be careful of the microphone…

GAROS: Oh I don’t want to deal with it…yes anything else?

LEVINE: So I’ll continue asking you questions about Manchester before you left for Greece. Okay your brother… 

GAROS: My brother.

LEVINE: Your brother died?

GAROS: Mm-hmm, three years ago. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and this is? What do you call this a prayer card? 

GAROS: Uh they give it to you after the funeral. We had to take it; it doesn’t do anything. It’s just the memory of the date and the services. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. I see and that was in Manchester where you had the funeral?

GAROS: Right. 

LEVINE: Uh huh, well when you think back of your life in Manchester. Can you remember like where you lived? What it was like? 

GAROS: Well it wasn’t like it is today [laughs] I can tell you that. 

LEVINE: What was different? 

GAROS: Well the environment of the…the section we was…we didn’t have everything like we have today. 

LEVINE: What…do you remember the house? 

GAROS: Yeah we lived on Union and Spruce Street, and I went to [Unintelligible: 0:04:12] school. What else can I say?

LEVINE: Do you…was there a large Greek community? 

GAROS: Community, yes. Mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and how did they…did they observe a lot of the Greek ways… 

GAROS: Oh definitely.

LEVINE: …in Manchester? Like in what ways did they keep up the Greek tradition?

GAROS: Well we have different…like we celebrate name days.

LEVINE: Oh tell me about that. 

GAROS: Yeah. There’s a Saint that they follow after…like say my husband’s name day is March 25th and we celebrated that. 

LEVINE: Now was that his…that’s the Saint’s—the name day that your husband has? I mean his…what’s his first name? 

GAROS: Evangelos. E-V-A-N-G-E-L-O-S.

LEVINE: And is that the name day for Evangelos?

GAROS: Yes, yes mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: Plus the…what do you call it? No the um…oh I can’t remember how its called. Just like we have Fourth of July here—that was a day of the 25th of March over there. 

LEVINE: Oh really, it was a patriotic day? 

GAROS: Yes, yes, yes. 

LEVINE: The 25th of March?

GAROS: Of March, yes. 

LEVINE: And what would do on the 25th? 

GAROS: Oh they had parades over there, and they even had them here before too but now they discontinued that. 

LEVINE: But in Manchester when you were little they still had them? 

GAROS: Yes they still had them. Mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and they’d have parades and then do they have like a feast or?

GAROS: They did have feast yes. Mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: Yeah. 

GAROS: Over there. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: So that’s a tradition I guess. 

LEVINE: Yeah, yeah and do you remember anything about like the grownups in Manchester when you were a little girl—what they did for a social life? What they did for fun?

GAROS: They really didn’t have much those days. They all worked and they all kept together with the families.  Now they have changed a lot but those days they were so confined to the home mostly, and the ladies worked in the shops on the mill, somewhere, and the husbands provided. So like I said today its different. 

LEVINE: Yeah. 

GAROS: Very much. 

LEVINE: Was there a particular kind of occupation that a lot of the Greek men had in Manchester? What kind of work did they do?

GAROS: Mostly shoe-workers I guess.

LEVINE: In like a shoe factory?

GAROS: Yes. Yes.

LEVINE: Uh huh.

GAROS: My father was a truck driver for [Crystal] laundry.

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: And there weren’t too many driving in those days. 

LEVINE: Oh so that was considered a good job to be a driver? 

GAROS: Mm-hmm, yeah.

LEVINE: Uh huh and your mother, did she ever work? 

GAROS: She didn’t work then but she worked after.

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: Yeah after we came back from Greece, she worked. 

LEVINE: I see. 

GAROS: Yeah. 

LEVINE: Well what was it that…why was it that you went to Greece when you were a little girl? 

GAROS: Well my father thought that we would live there. He loaded up the truck that he had with all of our furniture and all. So he intended to stay there but I don’t think he found things the way he wanted over there so we came back.

LEVINE: Tell a little about the history. Your father came over here first. 

GAROS: Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: And then he got a job in Manchester?

GAROS: Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: And then he sent for your mother?

GAROS: No my mother came here as a youngster [phone call in background interrupts at 0:07:21] oh gosh. 

LEVINE: Oh okay we’ll pause here.

LEVINE: …for a phone call. Let’s see we were talking about your father came here first. 

GAROS: First his father came, and then my father came, and my mother came here a single girl in 1916.

LEVINE: Oh.

GAROS: So they got married in 1917.

LEVINE: Did they ever tell you how they met or anything about it?

GAROS: Oh in those days it was proxy [laughs]. That’s all it was in those days. 

LEVINE: You mean because they were near each other?

GAROS: Mm-hmm. They came from the same hometown from Greece…[Pentalofos] both of them?

LEVINE: Pentalofos?

GAROS: Yeah, uh huh. They both came from there. 

LEVINE: And did they keep up…in other words do you think they had a typical Greek wedding in Manchester?

GAROS: Oh yes they did. Uh huh, and my mother had white and everything. I have her wedding pictures. It was probably one of those rare things that they have those days. They didn’t have too much you know and they didn’t know too much about the customs over here neither. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Uh huh. 

GAROS: So she didn’t know the language neither. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: So I guess they got along pretty good after that. 

LEVINE: Yeah now…now when you say your father decided he wanted to go back, do you know what was in his mind? Why he wanted to go back?

GAROS: No I don’t know why probably because his folks were there and he felt as though he had to go be with the folks. I don’t know. I never knew that.

LEVINE: Uh huh and so he packed everything into the truck?

GAROS: Everything in his truck.

LEVINE: And where did…and then what?

GAROS: We went by ship to Greece.

LEVINE: Did you remember leaving Manchester and saying goodbye to people?

GAROS: Yes, yes, yes. 

LEVINE: Yeah. 

GAROS: It was touchy [laughs]. 

LEVINE: Yeah. 

GAROS: I remember that much.

LEVINE: Do you remember anything you personally—as a child—wanted to take with you to Greece? 

GAROS: No I…I was confused. I didn’t know what was going on at that age especially, no responsibility, no what I can I say?

LEVINE: Yeah. You were probably around nine or so? 

GAROS: Something like that, yeah. 

LEVINE: Nine years old, yeah. Okay so you got the boat to Greece.

GAROS: Mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: And do you remember what boat that was?

GAROS: Well either one…either the Byron or the Edison. I don’t remember which one it was. 

LEVINE: Oh I see so one of those boats you took to Greece and one of those boats you took back…

GAROS: Back yeah. 

LEVINE: in 1930. 

GAROS: Yeah, Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: I see. Do you remember anything about going back…going to Greece that time?

GAROS: All I remember was my mother was so sick in that boat. It was funny. It wasn’t funny really; it was pathetic really. She thinks she’s decent day all the time when we’re in the boat.  

LEVINE: Do you remember when the boat landed in Greece?

GAROS: I remember when? 

LEVINE: You remember what was going on when the boat…

GAROS: No, no, no. It was interesting and yet I don’t know it didn’t faze me at all. Like I said if my brother was living, he would have remembered more than I did. He was very observing. 

LEVINE: Uh huh, uh huh. Well do you remember, where did you go when you were settling down in Greece?

GAROS: Well Pentalofos. 

LEVINE: Pentalofos, and was there a house or…?

GAROS: Oh yeah my grandparents were there. 

LEVINE: And what do you remember about them?

GAROS: Oh they were tickled to see us. 

LEVINE: Yeah. 

GAROS: They couldn’t do enough for us. I remember my grandmother was very petite; she always wanted me to be with her. 

LEVINE: Did you ever go places with her? 

GAROS: Around the neighborhood there. There wasn’t much then because they didn’t have any cars then; they didn’t have no electricity. They didn’t have anything, anything… no toilets, no facilities of any kind. 

LEVINE: So what would you do like in a given day when you were back in Greece?

GAROS: Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: And maybe you’d be with your grandmother? 

GAROS: Yeah mm-hmm and friends, a lot of relatives there. No matter where you go they’re all related to you. I went to Greek school there. 

LEVINE: So in other words you learned in Greek?

GAROS: Mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: And I’ve kept it up and I haven’t stopped reading Greek papers, and being with the Greek people all the time—even here. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and how is the school different in Greece?

GAROS: Oh they are different. They have wood stoves and…it wasn’t the same as we have here. 

LEVINE: Well can you say anything that was real different? 

GAROS: What can I say? How different? Different teachers had different lessons to give you. We didn’t have the same teacher all day long; we had to change teachers [recording interrupted by phone call at 0:11:51]  

LEVINE: Okay we’re stopping here.

GAROS: Oh gosh. 

LEVINE: We’re resuming now again after a phone call. You were saying about the Greek school was different… 

GAROS: Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: And you had different teachers…

GAROS: Teachers for like religion, and for history, and mathematics; they were all different teachers. 

LEVINE: Now was Pentalofos was it…it was in Macedonia?

GAROS: Mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: And was it a little town?

GAROS: A little town. 

LEVINE: And was it in the mountains?

GAROS: Yes up in the mountains very high. I don’t remember how many feet. It’s high, and I’ve been there several times after that but I don’t remember how high it is. 

LEVINE: Yeah, did they have like a market day there?

GAROS: A market?

LEVINE: A market day? 

GAROS: Not in that village. In another village they’d have it—in a bigger town.

LEVINE: Uh huh and would you go to market days? 

GAROS: I didn’t. My mother and father used to go. I didn’t. Basically then we were too young, and they didn’t want to take us away. When I remember all of that, I just can’t make it out. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and so do you remember anything about the scenery—about the town—what it looked like? 

GAROS: The scenery was beautiful, beautiful and like I said we didn’t have any roads for cars. There were the…what do you call it? In the winter my grandfather would open a path and we’d walk behind him. Because he had boots, he was in America of course, and he had boots on and he’d open up the roads, and we’d go to school and we’d take our own firework…firewood rather. 

LEVINE: To school?

GAROS: To school yeah. 

LEVINE: Each child?

GAROS: To burn at the stove. Yeah, mm-hmm, each child yeah and then we’d go home and have lunch there. 

LEVINE: Can you remember any of the foods that you had in Greece that you liked? 

GAROS: There were several things that we liked but mostly the lamb over there that they used and something else by the name of Pita and Greek cheese and all that. We didn’t have any toast or anything like that. Bread was made at the house and nothing was bought. Everything was real natural. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and what did your father do for work when he was in Greece? 

GAROS: He was a truck driver there, from one city to the other but not in Pentalofos …further down in the larger cities. So like I say he traded his old truck and bought a new one with a partner. Then finally he decided in a little while that we were going back to America and I was the happiest girl that I can remember [laughs]. 

LEVINE: Why were you so happy? 

GAROS: I knew enough that it wasn’t the same thing as America. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: We didn’t have any facilities whatsoever and when he said we’re coming back I was thrilled.

LEVINE: Now did your father say why? 

GAROS: No, no. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. How’d your mother feel?  

GAROS: She went along with him but I think she wanted to come back. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm.

GAROS: Because like I say we were used to being here and it wasn’t the same that’s all.

LEVINE: Mm-hmm what about your brother—what was his name? 

GAROS: Aristotle.

LEVINE: Aristotle. 

GAROS: And they call him [Tillie].

LEVINE: Oh uh huh. What… how did Aristotle feel about it? 

GAROS: He was a lot different than me and he remembered more than I did.

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: He was very good about that even up until the last minute he was alive here he would always say “do you remember that Athena? Do you remember that?” He always reminded me about things that I couldn’t remember. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: Yeah. 

LEVINE: And did he…was he happy to be coming to America? 

GAROS: Yes. Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: He was younger than I. 

LEVINE: So how was it leaving your grandparents when you came back? 

GAROS: How was it? 

LEVINE: How was it saying goodbye to your grandparents? 

GAROS: It was hard. It was really hard. 

LEVINE: Did they say anything to you? Give you any advice? 

GAROS: They were hugging us and oh the only thing I remember my grandmother always told my mother, “don’t forget when Athena is eighteen years old, I want you to marry her.”

LEVINE: Mm-hmm.

GAROS: Because once she stays and gets older she will never want to get married. I remember that and I did get married when I was eighteen. Isn’t that something? I remember that. 

LEVINE: Yeah. So your grandmother thought that if you didn’t get married at eighteen, you wouldn’t want to?

GAROS: I wouldn’t want to or I’d be an old maid how they think over there, oh you got to get married because it’s a…like a must. 

LEVINE: Yeah they have certain definite ideas about men and women…

GAROS: Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: …and what they should do. 

GAROS: Mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: Well can you say anything about that? What the ideas are about…

GAROS: Well the ladies over there have to follow the men’s orders mostly. Today they’re independent; they’re different, very different and that’s about what I remember because like I say I wasn’t very particular about learning things or following their advice. I don’t know what it was. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. What was your father like? Can you remember him when you were in Greece? 

GAROS: Oh yes. My father was very nice; everybody liked him. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: And he was about one of the men here in Manchester even…that talked English and they all asked him to interpret for them, and he was one of the first ones from our village to become American citizen. They always called him [Englese], that means Englishman, and they always called him that because he was…became an American citizen so my mother became a citizen right after him because she married him at a certain time and she derived her citizenship through him.

LEVINE: Ah uh huh. 

GAROS: So my father believed in being an American.

LEVINE: Yeah how did he feel about that, what was his attitude about being an American?

GAROS: He never mentioned it but I guess he was happy being an American, yep.

LEVINE: And so when you came…so when you were still in Greece do you remember any celebrations [Phone call interrupts at 0:17:34] oh we’re pausing again.

LEVINE: Okay we’re resuming again after a phone call. Let’s see we were talking about in Greece. 

GAROS: Mm-hmm. Celebrations and all…

LEVINE: Celebrations. Any rituals?

GAROS: Well Easter time is a big thing over there. They celebrate for a whole week; they fast, and then they have services. I don’t remember going but I think I used to go…like I say…it’s vague. 

LEVINE: Yeah, do you remember May Day?

GAROS: They celebrate May Day over there very much so.

LEVINE: Can you say whatever you can remember about that? 

GAROS: Well they go and they cook a whole lamb and they have a big party all day long. They sing and they dance, and they feed the people and the business that are there. 

LEVINE: Did they go from house to house or where did they have this? 

GAROS: No they had it outdoors mostly because they call it May First and they…its spring. 

LEVINE: Is it a celebration of spring?

GAROS: It’s like a celebration yes. They have a lot going on that day. 

LEVINE: Do you remember any like births or marriages or funerals, any ways that the Greeks…

GAROS: I went to a wake to a grandfather. Not a grandfather, my father’s…my grandfather’s brother had died and I never witnessed anything like that and I never wanted to witness anything like that it. It was so scary and how can I say it? And since that time I never forgot that funeral. They lay him out in the house and they sing some old sad songs, and he was …he was there at the end he looked awful. And I could never get that picture out of my mind and in fact even now I hate to go to a funeral. That’s how much it bothered me. 

LEVINE: Wow.

GAROS: Yeah so they have other celebrations at Easter time. They have a big thing for that. 

LEVINE: Well at a wake what would happen at the wake? 

GAROS: Nothing they just sit there around the corpse, or whatever they call it, and they sing sad songs. They don’t keep them there more than twenty-four hours; they have to bury them right away because like I say there’s no embalming. 

LEVINE: Was there a procession? 

GAROS: Yes, yeah. They carried them to …the casket from the cemetery yeah. To church first and then the cemetery but I never went to one of those, but I saw this man and like I say it was morbid.

LEVINE: Okay so when you were coming back you either came back on the Edison or the Byron? 

GAROS: Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: And you…do you remember the [phone call interrupts at 0:20:25]

GAROS: Oh no. 

LEVINE:  Okay now after the phone call. Do you remember anything of that voyage that you were or you and your, mother, father, and brother were coming back to the United States? 

GAROS: No not too much like I said my mother was sick again coming back, and she never had a meal with us and then we landed in Ellis Island I guess. 

LEVINE: Well do you remember were you down in the bottom of the ship? Were you in the steerage? What they call steerage in the… like a dormitory?

GAROS: We were in second class I think—whatever that is—I don’t know. 

LEVINE: When you…did you have like a cabin?

GAROS: Yes oh yes. Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: With just your family?

GAROS: Yes just my family, yeah, uh huh. 

LEVINE: And what were meals like on the ship?

GAROS: I don’t remember too much but I remember spaghetti was around on the floor all over the place [laughs].

LEVINE: Oh uh huh and do you remember when the ship came into the New York harbor? 

GAROS: No. 

LEVINE: And tell anything you remember about Ellis Island. Do you remember? 

GAROS: All I can remember was it was a great big building, and when we were there, they fed us and they interviewed people. But like I say it’s vague really. I don’t know why. 

LEVINE: Do you know if you had to stay over night? 

GAROS: I don’t think we stayed over night. I think we came to [Fall River] after that. 

LEVINE: Did someone meet you?

GAROS: That I don’t remember because my father could speak English so I don’t think he needed anybody to help us out. 

LEVINE: And so you probably then took a train? 

GAROS: We took a train. 

LEVINE: And to Fall River? 

GAROS: Yeah, mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: And then did you stay there? 

GAROS: No…we came…no we came by boat I think to Fall River.

LEVINE: Oh.

GAROS: And from Fall River we came here by train. 

LEVINE: You came then to Manchester? 

GAROS: Mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: By train, and what was it like coming back to Manchester? 

GAROS: Oh it was beautiful! [laughs]

LEVINE: Tell…can you describe it when you came back?

GAROS: Well it was like I say like heaven to see our old relatives again [phone call interrupts at 0:22:23].

LEVINE: Okay let’s go again. You got to Manchester and you felt like you were like it was in heaven?

GAROS: In heaven. 

LEVINE: Can you describe some of the things that you saw or the way you felt? 

GAROS: Well everybody was so anxious to see us, and they couldn’t do enough for us. They took us out to buy us clothes and what can I say? We came to my uncle; he had an apartment there and we were there for a while until we got our own. So that’s…

LEVINE: Do you remember the difference in dress? The difference in the clothes you had in Greece? 

GAROS: Yes they were different. Yeah uh huh—different over there than over here. 

LEVINE: Can you think of any of the differences? Shoes or kinds of dresses? Did you wear dresses?  

GAROS: Well the dresses over there were different they were made with a long… and the waistline was up to here. 

LEVINE: Oh empire waist? 

GAROS: Yeah something like that—yeah that that I remember and they had their hair mostly long.

LEVINE: Did you have long hair? 

GAROS: No I didn’t but my father used to cut my hair, and he cut a lot of girls hair besides so he was trying to mix in with different ways of living over there. So that’s about what I can remember about coming into Manchester again with my uncle waiting for us, and getting our preparations for… they took me out to but clothes like I said. I don’t know what else that I could remember. 

LEVINE: Do you remember any of your brothers’ reactions to coming back?

GAROS: My only brother? Well we came together. 
 
LEVINE: Yeah. How did he feel about coming back?

GAROS: I think he was a little different than I because he was more quiet but he remembered like I said more than I ever did, and then we went to school but again in Manchester. 

LEVINE: Well how was that for you going then back to school? 

GAROS: Well we didn’t…we couldn’t remember any English at all when we came back, but then we picked it up right away. So they put me in fourth grade and from fourth I skipped 5 and 5A and all I got out of school really early after that—through the eighth grade and I went to high school for a while and then I fell in love with my husband.

LEVINE: How did you meet your husband? 

GAROS: He came from Greece and he comes from the same hometown. We had met him there and who ever knew that I’d be marrying him! [laughs]

LEVINE: Well how did you happen to meet him in Greece? He was just…

GAROS: Well like I say, his mother was my brother’s godmother, so we get to know each other. But like I said nothing developed at that time. 

LEVINE: Right well you were only twelve.

GAROS: Yes, yeah. 

LEVINE: When you came back?

GAROS: Right. Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: But this was in 19…he came in’32 all right and in ’34 I think we started seeing each other.

LEVINE: Do you know what it was about him that you liked? 

GAROS: Mmm nothing I don’t know just one of those things. Love at first sight or something I don’t know what you might call it [laughs].

LEVINE: Uh huh and did he pursue you? Did he…did he pursue you for a while?

GAROS: For a while yes, mm-hmm. In fact we didn’t get…let’s see we 1934…we didn’t get married until 1936.

LEVINE: Now how was your family in relation to you getting married to your husband? What was their attitude? 

GAROS: They thought I was young but then they liked him. And being like a same…from the hometown, they all know the families and all that…there’s no…there was nothing there to bother us. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Uh huh. 

GAROS: So we got married in ’36.

LEVINE: Yeah now was it like arranged through the family?

GAROS: No! It wasn’t arranged at all. No. 

LEVINE: No. 

GAROS: We kept seeing each other secretly in fact for a while [laughs].

LEVINE: Oh really because you didn’t want the family to know? 

GAROS: Yeah come on we figured I was young and we were really seeing each other secretly. Yeah.

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: So we had a big wedding and in fact this month we’re having the 59th anniversary. 

LEVINE: Oh wonderful. 

GAROS: Isn’t that something? 

LEVINE: Yep, yeah. Now was it a big Greek wedding? 

GAROS: Yes a big Greek wedding.

LEVINE: And what was it like, could you describe the wedding that you had? 

GAROS: Um if you want to know…even at that time I didn’t remember that I was being married I don’t know I was just like a child. 

LEVINE: Yeah uh huh. 

GAROS: I was a child—only eighteen. But we…like I said we stayed engaged for two years and we got to know each other very well. His mother wanted it to be me very bad. She wanted…

LEVINE: What is there somebody? Right we’re stopping here [0:27:12]

LEVINE: We’re resuming now after Mrs. Garos’ grandson has come in and gone out [laughs]. Okay so you were like a child but did you like wear a white dress? 

GAROS: Yes. I couldn’t find a dress in fact I was so tiny. I didn’t weight more than…my husband thought I was eighty-nine pounds but I thought I was ninety-eight pounds [laughs].

LEVINE: Oh so you were petite.

GAROS: Yeah in fact I have my wedding picture right on the wall if you want to see it after?  

LEVINE: Afterwards we’ll look at that. 

GAROS: Yeah, yeah. 

LEVINE: So what was your husband doing then in Manchester? 

GAROS: He opened up a place with his brother at the market. 

LEVINE: Oh and so did he continue working in that market after you were married? 

GAROS: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm, yes. How long did it last now was…his brother had to go back to Greece again…that was in…I think 1940s his brother took off. 

LEVINE: So then did he give up the market? 

GAROS: No he kept it up. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: Yeah my husband had his mother here too of course. She brought them over here. She was young widow so she brought the boys over. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: And she died very young. Do you want to know that too? 

LEVINE: Yeah. 

GAROS: Yeah. She died in 1940; she was only forty-seven years old. 

LEVINE: What did she die of? 

GAROS: She died of cancer as far as I know. But you know in those days they didn’t say much about cancer. 

LEVINE: Did you have a close relationship with your mother-in-law? 

GAROS: Yes well I lived with her. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: Until she was taken to the hospital and then she never came back. It was only four years I think that we lived together, yeah. 

LEVINE: I see. Was that typical that the mother-in-law would live with…

GAROS: [Interrupts] Oh yes. Oh yes, yes yes. 

LEVINE: Even in Manchester that was typical?

GAROS: Yes. Yeah, mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: But no more [laughs].

LEVINE: No more? 

GAROS: Everybody wants their own place and everybody wants their own life; yeah it’s a lot different. 

LEVINE: Yeah is there anything else about Manchester at that time that has changed a lot? 

GAROS: Oh definitely everything has changed. You don’t even know where you are sometimes because its one-way streets and there aren’t buildings around and all that. It’s very different. 

LEVINE: Uh huh well when you got here in 1930 I guess people were driving automobiles. 

GAROS: Not too many. 

LEVINE: No? 

GAROS: No, not too many. 

LEVINE: What else did they get around in? 

GAROS: Well some had horses and … they used to walk mostly because everything was in walking distance. The shops and the mills were all close by. Then people started to scatter around and go on the outskirts. 

LEVINE: Were there a lot of immigrant children like in the school when you came back? 

GAROS: Not too many. Not too many. 

LEVINE: And were there other groups besides Greek people who were coming from Europe to Manchester? Were there other kinds of nationalities? 

GAROS: I don’t know but there must have been because it’s Polish and Italians and what not so I don’t know. 

LEVINE: But you don’t remember them like in your school or in your class?

GAROS: No in school everybody mostly talked English at that time so I wouldn’t know if they were foreigners or not. 

LEVINE: I see. I see. So let’s see then it was this then….when your father became a citizen.

GAROS: Oh he became a citizen in nineteen…probably sixteen [1916] or maybe sooner before that. 

LEVINE: I see. I see. 

GAROS: Very, very early. Yeah, very early. 

LEVINE: And your mother became a citizen on his citizen’s papers? 

GAROS: On his…yeah. Mm-hmm, right. 

LEVINE: I see so then did that make you a citizen? 

GAROS: Well I was born here. 

LEVINE: Right and he was a citizen and you were born here. 

GAROS: Yeah, mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: Right, okay. Let’s see so after your husband…did you work at all after you were married? 

GAROS: I worked for a while in a shoe shop but not too long…when was it? Not too…no I didn’t work too much. I stayed at home for a while. I was sickly.

LEVINE: What’s wrong with you? 

GAROS: I had pleurisy and was very run down but I got over it because I was young I guess. But about that time…then we were married eight years and I had my daughter. 

LEVINE: And what’s her name? 

GAROS: Barbara. She lives next door.

LEVINE: Mm-hmm. 

GAROS: So then I stayed home with her and I didn’t do too much. I used to take her to nursery school. 

LEVINE: Was this a Greek nursery school? 

GAROS: No, no it was one in Manchester. 

LEVINE: And then did you have other children? 

GAROS: No, that’s the only daughter we had. 

LEVINE: Barbara. 

GAROS: Yeah, mm-hmm. We moved here…we bought the place over here in 1946 and we didn’t move here until probably five or six years later. But my folks came here ahead of us because they were being…what do you call it? They had to move out of their house what do you…

LEVINE: Evicted? 

GAROS: Hmm? 

LEVINE: Evicted. 

GAROS: Evicted, yeah because they wanted the tenant for their own purpose—for their own relatives. So my folks…so we had a little camp over there and my husband sort of made it into a little apartment so they could move into it before us. So my granddaughter lives over there now. 

LEVINE: Oh. 

GAROS: Yeah so we’re all together. 

LEVINE: Now your husband was working in the store.

GAROS: Uh huh. 

LEVINE: And then did he start another business? 

GAROS: Well he started the slaughterhouse that we have here—killing lambs and cows and all that. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and so when did he start the slaughterhouse? 

GAROS: Well he built it in 1946 so he started right away. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and he’s done that ever since? 

GAROS:  Mm-hmm ever since yeah.

LEVINE: And he does that now? 

GAROS: Now yeah uh huh. But not so much now because age and all. 

LEVINE: Uh huh.

GAROS: So he doesn’t go too much there. 

LEVINE: Does he cater to the Greek community? 

GAROS: In Easter time he kills lambs for the Greek people. They buy whole lambs for Easter. 

LEVINE: Really? 

GAROS: It’s a very big tradition, yeah. 

LEVINE: Now where does he get the lambs from? 

GAROS: They bring them to him from Maine, Vermont, and New Hampshire. 

LEVINE: I see, uh huh. 

GAROS: But he hasn’t been doing it too much of it, and then he has his own [iterations] also. 

LEVINE: He raises lambs? 

GAROS: But too many, yeah. He has them in a barn right now. 

LEVINE: I see. 

GAROS: Yeah, mm-hmm he loves it, and he’s on the go all the time. He doesn’t stop so I’m glad that he does because it keeps him going and he’s not like some people sitting home watching television, and getting paralyzed or something like that. He’s very active. 

LEVINE: Yes, I know in fact it’s hard for me to catch him [both laugh].

GAROS: Yeah, he’s very active. He puts on barbeques. He does… what can I say? He’s very active…

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: …and that makes me happy like I said because he’s not a potato couch they call it? What is it called? 

LEVINE: Couch potato right. 

GAROS: Yeah, couch potato, yeah. It’s the other way around. 

LEVINE: Well now how is this time in your life—for you? 

GAROS: Very good. 

LEVINE: Yeah? 

GAROS: Yeah, uh huh. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: We like the same things together. Every four years we go to Greece. We have the Pan-Macedonian conventions there and… 

LEVINE: What is it Pan-Macedonian? 

GAROS: Pan-Macedonian—all of that part of Greece that we…that my folks came from, and we’ve taken that in and we haven’t missed one convention. Well we did miss the first four or five and then after that we haven’t missed one… 

LEVINE: And what…

GAROS: …from 1947 up until today. 

LEVINE: Wonderful. 

GAROS: Yeah. 

LEVINE: What happens at Pan…

GAROS: Oh we get together with people that we haven’t seen for a lot of times and each year we make new friends. And that’s in Greece where the conventions are—in Salonika—the busy, the big city next to Athens is Salonika—Thessaloniki they call it in fact. 

LEVINE: Salonika, uh huh. 

GAROS: Yeah mm-hmm. So it’s a…to me I would rather go there than go to Florida or any other place. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: But we did have a convention in Florida and Chicago and we have them in the States also.

LEVINE: And you go to those? 

GAROS: Yes we haven’t missed them. This year we had it in Boston. 

LEVINE: So each four years you go to Greece?

GAROS: Greece, mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: And every year you go to a convention? 

GAROS: To a convention right, mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: How do you feel about yourself as far as a part of you being Greek and a part of you being American? How do you feel about it?  Do you feel you are mostly Greek or mostly American? 

GAROS: Oh I haven’t considered that at all. I feel like…I like both Greek and American and so like I say I haven’t stopped reading and talking Greek and having the traditions that we’re supposed to have. I haven’t neglected it or anything like that. 

LEVINE: What kind of traditions do you still you keep up?
 
GAROS: Well my husband’s name day—that’s March 25th and no matter what day it comes on we celebrate on a Sunday.

LEVINE: And what do you do on that March day?

GAROS: Oh we have a big feast. 

LEVINE: Here? 

GAROS: Mm-hmm. People…the men go downstairs and the ladies, they always separate and they all sit in there and they all bring something but I prepare whatever I have to have, yeah.

LEVINE: And what do the men talk about and what do the ladies talk about? 

GAROS: Who knows what the men talk about downstairs [laughs]. They come up and get the feed and then they go downstairs again because I haven’t’ got a big room and I haven’t’ got a dining room. So we have a big what do you call it? Downstairs? A recreation room. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Now do you invite strictly Greek people or non-Greek people too?

GAROS: No we have non-Greek also. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: Oh he has a lot of friends. If you go, no matter where you go even in this town everybody knows him as [Gully], Gully, Gully—everybody knows him and nobody knows him as Evangelos [laughs].

LEVINE: Oh now so let’s see what do you feel very satisfied that you’ve done in your life? What makes you feel proud or satisfied?

GAROS: I feel proud we’re active and we’re well liked people. We don’t snub anybody [laughs].

LEVINE: That’s good. 

GAROS: Yeah that’s one thing that I’m proud of, and like I say people all…they all love us and we love people too. 

LEVINE: Yeah that’s nice. 

GAROS: Yeah. 

LEVINE: Very nice. 

GAROS: My house is always open. I don’t have to invite anybody to come to the house. 

LEVINE: People drop in?

GAROS: Drop in all the time. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Is there…are there a large number of Greek people right around here? 

GAROS: No not here but Manchester there’s a lot of people. 

LEVINE: Manchester, yeah. 

GAROS: Over here there’s… mostly French. 

LEVINE: And how about religion. Was your family religious? 
  
GAROS: No but not that pious but we’re orthodox and we go to church whenever we have to maybe we don’t…its not compulsive but yet we don’t make a habit like going like some people have to. 

LEVINE: Right. 

GAROS: We keep up the tradition with whatever we have to do like we christened our grandson…great-grandson. My daughter is baptized in Greek also and you know. We keep up the tradition. 

LEVINE: Right. Right How about foods? Do you cook any foods that you…that people cook in Greece?

GAROS: Yeah all Greek uh huh. Mostly Greek. 

LEVINE: Can you mention any of those dishes that you make? 

GAROS: Well most of all its lamb [laughs] and then we have like rice, spinach and rice, and no I don’t know what to say about the Greek food. Do you know of any kind of Greek food that you…

LEVINE: Well how about the desserts? Do you cook those? 

GAROS: No I’m no good about desserts really but I can make other things. 

LEVINE: Yeah. The spinach and cheese pie?

GAROS: Yes but I don’t make that. 

LEVINE: Oh. 

GAROS: I’m no good that at all but people always bring me some. 

LEVINE: Oh uh huh. 

GAROS: Because the other night we went to the church festival and I bought some over there [laughs]—already made. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and how about the grape leaves? 

GAROS: I don’t make those neither. But I always go down to the restaurant and pick them up.

LEVINE: In Manchester?

GAROS: Yeah in Manchester—Athens Restaurant—I always go there and pick them up, and they’re delicious.  

LEVINE: Uh huh. Okay let’s see is there anything else, do you feel like the fact that you were born here, you went to Greece…

GAROS: Mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: …your parents were from Greece 

GAROS: Yeah. 

LEVINE: …you really lived most of your life now here…

GAROS: Mm-hmm. 

LEVINE: Do you feel that made a difference in the kind of person you are? The fact that you immigrated to this country? 

GAROS: I think we met so many people and I look forward to meeting them again and I haven’t felt like an outsider even when we came here again. Everybody was gracious I think. Everybody …I don’t know I don’t feel as though we were lonesome or anything like that because we’ve been so busy all the time. So I don’t feel anything about it, yeah. 

LEVINE: What do you think about this idea of the United States being called a melting pot? You’ve heard that? 

GAROS: No. 

LEVINE: The melting pot? In other words the idea that people come from all over to America and you’re like in a pot and everybody becomes an American. 

GAROS: Well they’re all…they have the opportunities here they don’t have in Europe. Over here you can become a policeman to a lawyer or whatever but over there there’s only certain people that can do that because they don’t have that kind of money. But now I guess they’re getting pretty good over there. 

LEVINE: Uh huh.

GAROS: They’re way ahead now. 

LEVINE: Uh huh.

GAROS: But those days it was just certain people that could do and afford all of that. 

LEVINE: But over here you felt like you could do it? 

GAROS: Everybody has an opportunity here, yeah. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAROS: Yeah it’s so different. 

LEVINE: Yeah. Is there anything else that you would say about the American society? I mean since you sort of know both the Greek and the American? 

GAROS: I’m happy as it is. We mix in with everybody so it’s really a nice country. That’s all I can say. 

LEVINE: Okay well maybe that’s a perfect place to end. 

GAROS: Yeah.

LEVINE: I want to thank you so much. 

GAROS: You’re welcome.

LEVINE: …for talking with me, and I’ve been speaking with Athena Garos. It’s November 6th 1995.

GAROS: Mm-hmm.

LEVINE: And I’m here in Hooksett, New Hampshire and this is Janet Levine for the National Parks Service and I’m signing off.  
