LEVINE: Today is August 1st, 1994 and I’m here in Copiague, Long Island, New York with Louisa Gaudioso who came from Italy in 1920 right around her eleventh birthday. 

GAUDIOSO: Right.

LEVINE: And…she came through Ellis Island. Let’s see…you were…were you detained there?

GAUDIOSO: Yes we were detained a whole week. 

LEVINE: Oh okay so you were at Ellis Island for a week.

GAUDIOSO: Right. 

LEVINE: Now…now let’s start well at the beginning talking about life in Italy before you came—what you can remember. Start with your birthdate and the town you lived in. 

GAUDIOSO: Well as you said I was eleven years—my eleventh birthday, and the name of my town was San Lorenzo. S-A-N L-O-R-E-N-Z-O. San Lorenzo. 

LEVINE: And did you live in San Lorenzo…

GAUDIOSO: [Interrupts] Yes we lived all our life there. 

LEVINE: All your life. 

GAUDIOSO: It’s a small town and not too many people. What else could I say?

LEVINE: Well maybe you can start with the house you lived in. Do your remember what it looked like?

GAUDIOSO: Well we had a small house and I can tell you my father was in the United States when he got married, and he came back to Italy to make the house bigger but then we got hit with the ear…with the…

LEVINE: the First World War?

GAUDIOSO: No!…the…oh I can’t remember… 

LEVINE: the earthquake?

GAUDIOSO: The earthquake, yeah. The earthquake—we got hit in our house. We had a church right near our house; the church fell on top of our house. So our house was all down and my father he was hurt. He was all…they couldn’t find him because the house fell, you know. We had…my grandmother, my grandfather, they were living down in the basement and they weren’t touched. But my mother and father they were living upstairs and my older sister, she was about three years old then…and my father—when he heard the noise, he went out to see what happened. When he saw that everything was shaking he went back to get my mother and the baby, and the house broke in half. So he fell down and all the stuff fell on top of him. So he was really hurt. Then my mother and my sister—my mother was carrying me—see that’s when I was born after that. My sister didn’t get hurt and my mother didn’t get hurt; they had just a few scratches I guess and everything like that, but they couldn’t find my father. So they were looking with the candles to find him because there was no electricity or nothing. So my grandmother she was looking with the candle all around and all around and she felt him. She felt him and she says to my mother ‘he’s alive! He’s alive. He’s warm.’ So then they took all the garbage out I guess, all the stones and everything because those are houses with the stones. And they took my father out and my father had seventy-five stitches on his head, and the Queen of Italy sent so much stuff for the people that were…like the mothers and family way. She used to send blankets, sugar, or cake, chalk—everything for the people you know. So my grandmother went over there, took even the stuff they said to her [Recording skips at 0:03:55] and the people who were giving the stuff said to her, ‘she don’t need anything because her son came home from the United States.’ They didn’t know he was hurt and the house was all down, so my poor grandmother went home, you know. They had to live in barracks. They had barracks. They had to live in barracks—so many people there you know, and after awhile and then my father, when he got better he came back to the United States. He came back to the United States. 

LEVINE: So that must have been in 1909?

GAUDIOSO: 1909. 1908! I was born 1909. So when he came back to the United States…of course then they were going to build a house bigger, instead of bigger, it got smaller! [laughs] But anyway, the First World War—that was 1914—he sent for us, and we couldn’t come because then the war broke out. We couldn’t come. So that time we—my sister, my other two sisters weren’t born yet…Yeah they were born yet.  They were born too, and we couldn’t come so then 1919 he sent the papers again so we had to go take pictures—everything again—and we left; I remember we left in the morning. We used to have a bus at the town; it used to come in at twelve o’clock once a day, and we had to leave with the bus and we went to Reggio Calabria, that’s the…the big town, you know, the big city and we were about maybe about two hours away from there. So we got there from there, and we had to go to Sicily and you go by boat to Sicily, and from Sicily we had to go to Naples and that’s where we got the ship. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Well now tell me your father’s name?

GAUDIOSO: My father’s name was Natale [Garcela]. N-A-T-A-L-E, and he was here by 19…maybe 1978...79, maybe you know he was here a long time. 

LEVINE: Oh. Uh huh. 

GAUDIOSO: He used to go back and forth, my father. 

LEVINE: When...so he had gone back and forth a few times?

GAUDIOSO: Yeah, yeah. Oh yeah. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and he came back…

GAUDIOSO: [Interrupts] He came back over here. 

LEVINE: When…no but when your mother was carrying you, that’s when he came back?

GAUDIOSO: He came back again yeah. 

LEVINE: The earthquake. 

GAUDIOSO: The earthquake. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAUDIOSO: But he was there when the earthquake came. See he just came back home when the earthquake came.

LEVINE: Now was he sending money to the family?

GAUDIOSO: Oh sure! 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAUDIOSO: Yeah. 

LEVINE: Uh huh.

GAUDIOSO: He was working for a dollar a day—my father! 

LEVINE: What was he doing?

GAUDIOSO: He worked different jobs when he first came here. The first time he said he worked in Buffalo, New York, and they had so much snow that they had to make trenches before they could go out, and he used to work for a dollar a day. 

LEVINE: And that’s before you came along?

GAUDIOSO: Before we came over, yeah. Then from there he went to West Virginia. His sister was living in West Virginia so he went to West Virginia. He went to West Virginia and he used to work in the coalmines. But he didn’t go in the coalmines, he used to…he used to have a good job then. He used to open the fence for the workers down…for the coal mine so they used to get the air with the fence, you know.  And he used to open those fences in the morning and close them at night when the workers used go out. He had a good job. He was making seven dollars a day then. He had a good job.

LEVINE: Yeah. 

GAUDIOSO: So then when we came, the owner of the coalmine used to tell my father, ‘when you’re family comes, you’re going to get a house’ you know because he lived with his sister. And he used to go cut his grass, take care of his things, you know, and when we came we had to live in one room—six people—where my father was because you know the houses over there in West Virginia they’re small, they’ve got two bedrooms upstairs and maybe one room downstairs in the kitchen. So we lived six…six people in one room. So then my father says to the owner of the coalmines there; he says, ‘you know I need the house, my family came,’ and he says ‘well go look for a house.’ He says, ‘and if there’s an empty house, you take it.’ Because over there they only pay for the very cheap houses you know at that time when we came. So they went and one of my sisters wanted a drink of water, and they were looking for the house, and when they went to look for the well, where the well was you know, my mother saw all colored people. And when she saw all colored people, she started crying my mother, you know because we never saw colored people.  So my father said ‘what’s the matter?’ She says ‘you brought me over here you know with my kids over here. I don’t…I don’t want to stay here.’ So he says all right we’re going to move away, you know, if I can’t get the house;’ he said, ‘don’t worry about it, we’re going someplace else.’ So that’s what they did. They changed…my father changed from one town they went to another town. We went to another town and they had the house but then he was working company work, piecework like four dollars a day. See he lost his good job; he was making four dollars a day.  Then we had…I used to go to school, and my older sister didn’t want to go to school. 

LEVINE: Well before we talk about school in this country, when you were…when you were back in Italy do you…well first of all do your remember any experiences with your father in Italy? Do you remember…

GAUDIOSO: Oh yeah. Well when my father came from…when he used to come back and forth you know, he was sick. Because when he was working a dollar a day, he got sick because they used to load…he used to work two jobs. They used to load trucks, and when the trucks used to go, they used to lay down on the ground, and he got sick. He got sick and went to the hospital. So my mother could get no mail from him so you know she figured maybe he was dead or something because he couldn’t write or anything because he didn’t know how to read and write, my father, and my mother either. So my older sister, one night she says to my mother, she got up in the morning and she says ‘Ma my father…I dreamed my father came home.’ So my mother says to her ‘go away, don’t…don’t tell me those stories,’ she says to her…says ‘I said the bus was coming at twelve o’clock.’ So we lived in the piazza, you know they call it the piazza. So my sister was right near—one maybe two houses away—she goes over there and she sees the bus come and she waits there. She waits there and she sees my father coming down; he had just a little suitcase and a stick you know to hold himself because he had…what do you call it? …sciatic on the leg. Oh before that my mother says to her—says to my sister—if your father comes even if he don’t bring…if he comes naked as long as he’s well, you know. So my sister said…so my father…she ran back home and she says to mother ‘Ma, Ma my father came, my father came.’ So my mother says ‘go away. Don’t kid me,’ you know.  So she says ‘No! My father came.’ At the meantime my father reached because my father…my mother was outside on the stoop like and she saw my father come. But then my mother right away—he sat on the chair—and my mother says his leg was hurting him and he jumped you know, he was hurting so my mother right away she went to the doctor because everybody knew my mother… small town, you know. So she says to the doctor, ‘my husband came home and I want you to come because he’s sick.’ So the doctor came over to the house and my mother says ‘you got to tell me the truth. You got the kids and you got your wife’ you know and he thought maybe he went someplace and got sick and so my father says, he says ‘I swear on my wife,’ he says ‘and my kids, no.’ And I said…so he told him the story that he used to work two jobs and used to lay on the ground. So for six months he was six and he got better. He got better. After six months he came back again. He came back to the United States again, and that’s when you know he come for us. 

LEVINE: So did you ever…when your father was in Italy when you were a little girl…

GAUDIOSO: [Interrupts] No I don’t remember my father. See we didn’t know my father. We used to have pictures of my father and we used to say to my mother, ‘Ma everybody’s got a father. We don’t have a father!’ So my mother used to say ‘yeah there’s your father on the picture,’ she used to tell us. 

LEVINE: What was your mother’s name?

GAUDIOSO: Carmela.

LEVINE: And her maiden name?

GAUDIOSO: Eraremeta Carmela. E-R-A-R-E-M-E-T-A.

LEVINE: And what kind of a woman was your mother? What kind of a personality did she have?

GAUDIOSO: She was a homemaker, you know, homemaker. My mother was sick all the time so, she had arthritis. She was very sick all the time, and then when we came here she was operated on.

LEVINE: Oh. 

GAUDIOSO: But we didn’t know what she had because we were young you know. 

We didn’t know. She went to the hospital and some…something she said…she used to get a pain in her stomach or something. You know we didn’t know. 

LEVINE: What kind of work did people do in the town?  

GAUDIOSO: Oh we used to stay in town…the town all the time. If people don’t have farms you know if they don’t…most of the people there if they have a farm or something, they go out everyday; they go out to work in the farms. But we never went; we used to go to school; we were four sisters and the fours sisters would go to school, and in the summertime we had to go private school. My mother—my father used to say right to my mother, ‘send my kids to school because they didn’t know how to read and write’ because when he had to write a letter he had to go to someplace else you know and find somebody to write a letter for him. So every year…every letter he used to write to my mother, ‘send my kids to school. Send my kids to school.’ 

LEVINE: What was school like for you?

GAUDIOSO: Oh I used to like school. See my older sister didn’t like school. 

LEVINE: Why did you like it?

GAUDIOSO: I used to like school. I used to like the school.

LEVINE: Was it a…was it a strict school?

GAUDIOSO: Oh yes a strict school. Yeah they’re strict over there. They’re strict. Then I had we had an aunt; she was a little jealous. She used to say when she says to my mother, she used to say, ‘who are you going to make do this all teachers!?’ Because we used to go to school you know [laughs].

LEVINE: Did you have grandparents?

GAUDIOSO: Yeah I had grandparents, and my grandparents lived in the farm all the time that’s why I says if they have farms, they live all out. And I used to get up early in morning; Wednesday we didn’t have school. One day we didn’t have school, and I used to sleep by myself because I used to bleed—my nose used to bleed. Somebody’s touching my nose, I used to bleed, and my three sisters used to sleep with my mother in the big bed but I used to sleep all by myself. I used to get up in the morning when I didn’t have school and I used to go to my grandfather, and my grandfather used to be on the farm with my grandmother. And my grandmother maybe was two blocks away or a block away and he used to call her ‘Mari, Mari!’ That was her name [Amuri]. ‘Come get the milk! Make the milk for Louisa. You will okay.’ They used to love me. So when we came over here, my father…my grandfather says to my mother ‘leave me Louisa over here because she can stay with me.’ So my mother says ‘no Louisa got to come with me. Wherever I go she’s got to go, my life would kill me then.’

LEVINE: What was your grandfather’s name?

GAUDIOSO: Dominic. 

LEVINE: And who’s…whose mother and father? 

GAUDIOSO: That was my mother’s father and mother. See my father’s mother and father, they were dead. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GAUDIOSO: They were dead. 

LEVINE: So do you remember any times on the farm when you were…?

GAUDIOSO: [Interrupts] Oh sure. I remember everything. They used to…every Christmas my grandfather used to kill a pig.

LEVINE: Wow. 

GAUDIOSO: And used to kill for us—his grandchildren. My mother used to say, ‘take it to the fair’ because they used to go to fair once a year, sometimes twice a year. My mother used to say to him ‘take it to the fair and sell it, you know.’ So he used to say ‘no I can’t sell the pigs,’ says, ‘I have to kill it for my grandchildren because this year I see them but next year maybe I don’t see them no more.’ We had a good grandfather.

LEVINE: Do you remember that whole procedure or…of killing the pig?

GAUDIOSO: Oh sure, yeah. Yeah. I remember everything. They used to put him on a sled, on a big bench, and they used to…a couple of people used to go help and they used to get the blood, and make pudding and something like that. And then they used to make the stuff and make the sausage and the salami, and all that stuff they used to make. And we never used to buy anything. My mother used to buy other things you know but the things like the wheat, the flour, vegetables, things like that; we never had to buy none, olive oil, because my grandfather used to have it. So he used to…and my mother used to go and help him sometimes, you know when she feel well she used to go and help him. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm. What do you remember as your favorite meals when you were little?

GAUDIOSO: Uh the macaroni. When they used…they made homemade macaroni in the hometowns, you know. 

LEVINE: How about bread?

GAUDIOSO: Bread—my mother... we…they make bread twice a month. They make the fresh bread and then they make like biscuits—long biscuits, long, long bread—and they’d dry it up. And my mother used to have a big trunk, maybe that big, and they used to put the dry bread in there, and for two weeks you have bread but then they soak it like you know before you eat it; they put something—they put olive oils. 

LEVINE: So did everybody in town get their own bread?

GAUDIOSO: Most of them yeah. We had the oven in the house—my house—my mother had the oven. A lot of people don’t have the ovens.

LEVINE: Right. 

GAUDIOSO: My mother had a big stove in the house, and when I went to Italy you know. I went to Italy, [Speaks to someone else in the room] ‘Marian when I went to Italy?’ [laughs] No when Claire Louisa was born. 1950. I went to Italy when my son was in the service—in Italy. 

LEVINE: Oh.

GAUDIOSO: So I went to Italy and then when I went to my hometown, I took my son and my niece of mine, and I went with these cousins—my mother’s nephew—that was my grandmother’s brother’s son—his family—I went to see them. 


