LEVINE: This is Janet Levine for the National Park Service, and I'm here with Rose Gillman. GILLMAN: Ruth Rose Gillman. LEVINE: Ruth Rose Gillman, in Hollywood, Florida. It's August 27, 1991. And Ruth Rose Gillman came from Czechoslovakia in 1927. GILLMAN: Under the name of? LEVINE: Under the name of Rose Ruth . . . GILLMAN: Liebervert. LEVINE: Liebervert. And she was at age twelve at that time. So I'm very happy to be here, and perhaps we can start by you telling me your birth date. GILLMAN: My birth date is May 30, 1916. LEVINE: And where were you born? GILLMAN: I was born in Hust, H-U-S-T, Czechoslovakia. LEVINE: And what was, what was Hust? Was it a small town or a city? GILLMAN: Well, it was a city? LEVINE: Uh-huh. A large city? GILLMAN: No, a small city. LEVINE: A small city. Uh-huh. Can you, did you live in Hust the whole time, all your twelve years? GILLMAN: No, no. No, my mother came from Roumania, which was at that point. So we lived at some time in Roumania, and the rest of the time it was Czechoslovakia that I lived. I was born in Czechoslovakia. But the borders used to change quite a bit, so I don't know what it was before I was born. It could have been Hungary, but that's all I can tell you, that I was born in Czechoslovakia, but I traveled in different areas, in Roumania, in Hungary, with my family, to visit family. LEVINE: What is the place that you remember living mostly in when you, before you came to the United States? GILLMAN: Well, I guess really Czechoslovakia. LEVINE: Uh-huh. So Hust would be where you remember . . . GILLMAN: Right. LEVINE: . . . having a home. GILLMAN: Yes, I do. LEVINE: Now what, can you recall that home, what it was like? GILLMAN: Well, it was like a house. It's a one-floor kind of a thing. It was rather modern. It had all wood floors and we did have electric lights and let me see what else can I tell you. My father had gone to America before us. He was here for six years before he took us out. That is my, I have, uh, at that time I had two brothers and a sister and myself. We came out at one time. However, I have two older sisters, and they came here a year prior to us coming. And I think this is important. We took, we had to go to Roumania. I don't remember exactly the capital of Roumania, to get our visas. LEVINE: Okay. Well, now, perhaps you could give me your father's name and your mother's name and her maiden name. GILLMAN: Okay. My father's name was Joseph Liebervert and my mother's maiden name was Ida Perl, P-E-R-L. And then did you spend time with your mother's parents? GILLMAN: Sometimes, yes. And they lived in Roumania. LEVINE: And was that a city where they lived? GILLMAN: No, it was a little town. The name of the town was Kerchest. Something like that, I remember. That's all I can remember. But we did spend time there visiting, you know. LEVINE: And can you remember what that was like? GILLMAN: Well, that was really like you had to do, go to the river to do your laundry. You didn't have electric lights. You had outside plumbing, you know, bathrooms outside. And it was a very, very small town, and my grandfather lived there. LEVINE: Could you make a guess at how to spell that town? GILLMAN: I haven't the slightest idea. Kerchest? K-E-R-C-H-E-S-T, maybe. I don't know. LEVINE: Okay, and so when you would travel there, would you travel with your brothers and sisters as well as your parents in Roumania? GILLMAN: Yes, uh-huh. My younger, you know, I'm the middle one. My brothers were younger, and my sister also was younger. Now, my sister, who was younger than I am with three-and-a-half years had a twin brother. And then we had a younger brother. And my twin brother, her twin is gone, he's passed away, but my younger brother is still living. And one of my older sisters is passed away. LEVINE: Well perhaps you could name your brothers and sisters from the oldest on down. GILLMAN: Okay. My oldest sister's name was Rose. My other sister's name was Helen. And then it's myself, and then my younger sisters. Well, then my brother, who was ten minutes older. His name was Sam. LEVINE: Oh, so you were a twin as well? GILLMAN: No, no. He was older than my younger sister. LEVINE: Oh, uh-huh. GILLMAN: His name was Sam and her name was Lillian. And my youngest brother who is alive, his name is Louis Liebervert. He lives in Chicago. LEVINE: So how, your father had come to the United States six years . . . GILLMAN: Prior to our coming. LEVINE: And how did it happen that he came? Why did he leave? GILLMAN: Well, when he left he just thought that he was coming here for six months to sell taleysim. Do you know what that means? LEVINE: No. GILLMAN: The religious shawls. So as fate had it, the shawls got all wet and he couldn't sell them for what he thought he would sell them. So he sold them for like ten cents apiece as opposed to a quarter apiece. So then he spent time, I had an aunt and uncle living here, he spent time in the United States and he saw all the good things, the freedom and everything that the U.S.A. has, and so he waited until he became a citizen, and then he brought us out here. LEVINE: I see. Now, were you a religious family? GILLMAN: Yes. Uh-huh. My father was a reverend. LEVINE: What particular religion? GILLMAN: He was, I don't know. You're not Jewish, are you? Or you don't know enough? Half and half? LEVINE: I don't know a lot about it. GILLMAN: This was, he was a shochet. That means he was killing chickens for kosher ways. LEVINE: Oh, uh-huh. GILLMAN: Okay. Does that, do you understand that? LEVINE: Yes. And so that was his job in Czechoslovakia. GILLMAN: Uh-huh. Well, it was his job there, but this is what he did here after he did it in the United States. LEVINE: And let's see, so you observed the holidays? GILLMAN: All Jewish traditions. Yes, every bit. Very religious. Very, very religious. My parents were very religious. LEVINE: And you remained that way after you came? GILLMAN: I am. Yes, I am still. I still observe the sabbath and all the holidays. LEVINE: I see. And what else can you remember about Hust? Can you remember the street? Anything about the house? GILLMAN: Where I lived, you mean? Well, I told you. It was a lovely house, and it was rather modern, because we had lovely wooden floors, and we had inside plumbing and we had electricity. At that point in time it was a city, and they already had that. LEVINE: I see. So did you, were you sort of, what would you call it? Something like middle class in that city. I mean, did most people have electricity? GILLMAN: On that I can't answer, but we were what we call middle class because my mother had, was, she had a little bakery, she would bake, and a little grocery store. And so, and my father did, was very highly educated in Hebrew, so he studied in the morning, and then he did this other job. And so as a result of that we were what you call a middle class family. LEVINE: Uh-huh. And did you go to school there? GILLMAN: Yes. I went to school for a few grades until my father realized that he's bringing us to America. So he told my mother not to send me to school so I wouldn't be mixed up with the languages. Okay? LEVINE: Yeah. So did you speak, what did you speak in the home? GILLMAN: Yiddish. LEVINE: Yiddish. Uh-huh. And did you also know Czechoslovakian? GILLMAN: No, not really. But I understood Hungarian a little because there was also Hungarian spoken in the house, and also some Roumanian. Because you see the borders changed, so my parents learned these different language, and when they wanted to say a secret, so they spoke in the languages, as you well know. But I really took, I can't speak any of the languages. I can understand a little Hungarian because, and Yiddish a lot. I can understand a lot of Yiddish, but Hungarian was spoken quite a bit, so I even understand a little bit of it. But that's about it. LEVINE: So can you remember anything else about being a child in Czechoslovakia? GILLMAN: Well, I can just tell you this. I remember very well how we would travel by coach to see my grandfather. That I remember. LEVINE: What was the coach like? GILLMAN: It was, they call it a thiacker. That's what it was called in those days. That I remember very well. LEVINE: Thiacker. GILLMAN: Thiacker. That's like a coach, you know, with a horse and a wagon. And it was almost like a covered wagon because it did have a cover should it rain. And so I remember that very well because I had an aunt whose favorite I was, and she would take me many more times than my sisters or brothers to visit my grandfather. LEVINE: And then would your aunt drive the coach or would someone . . . GILLMAN: No. You hire, you hire. You had a driver. LEVINE: And was it a long distance? GILLMAN: It took a few hours. Yeah, I would think, if I remember correctly it took about three, four hours. LEVINE: Can you remember any other things that you liked to do when you were there as a child? GILLMAN: Well, I assume mostly all the things that children even do today. Jump rope, play what do you call these on the floor? Jacks. They were like jacks, used similarly. And that's really what I could remember. I was very, for the time I went to school I was a very good student. And then I could tell you, when I came here to the United States, I passed eight grades in one year! They kept pushing me from one grade to the other. Of course, I was twelve. So whatever I did study evidently was equivalent to what they were able to put me through. LEVINE: I see. Okay, so your father came mainly to . . . GILLMAN: Do a little business. Really. LEVINE: Business. But it wasn't that he was going away from a bad situation. GILLMAN: No. LEVINE: He was, okay. He stayed here for six years. Now, why was it? Was he earning money to be able to bring you over? GILLMAN: Yes, to send, absolutely. He earned money to bring us over. And also he had to become an American citizen to be able to bring us here. LEVINE: I see. Did you have much communication with him during that period? GILLMAN: Letter-wise, yes. And he sent my mother money to keep us going, you know. LEVINE: So in other words you were six years old when he left? GILLMAN: Yeah. Just about. LEVINE: And . . . GILLMAN: But my youngest brother was, my mother was pregnant with my youngest brother when he left for this business thing. So my brother never knew his father until he came. LEVINE: So then when you, when you were sent for by your father to come, who made the arrangements? GILLMAN: My aunt and uncle that were here. LEVINE: And your aunt came with you? GILLMAN: There was one aunt that my, who lived here for some time a few years before, and my father paid her expenses to come to Czechoslovakia to bring us to the United States. LEVINE: Oh. Uh-huh. I see. GILLMAN: And I remember the boat very well. LEVINE: What was the name of the boat? The name? GILLMAN: Oh, those famous boats. You mentioned some of them. I'm not good at that either right now. I do know it, but I just can't think of it right now. LEVINE: Well, what port did you leave from? GILLMAN: Well, we left from, I think it was from Roumania that we had to leave. I don't remember why, but that's where, I know we took our visas there, and I think that part I'm not clear on, but I think it was from Roumania that we left, and we landed in Ellis Island. LEVINE: Now, can you remember packing up to go? GILLMAN: Oh, packing up? Yeah. We all did our own little things, whatever we had. LEVINE: Wait. Can you remember anything that you took with you? GILLMAN: Oh, yeah. I had a few dresses and I had maybe two, three pairs of shoes and I had a coat, a warm coat and a spring coat and a light coat and boots. I remember very well that I had boots because we came here at Christmas time so, you know, there it's cold. So shawls, you know. And I remember babushkas and all that stuff that I owned. And every one of us had to do our own packing. LEVINE: Can you remember anything your mother took that, uh, from the old country? GILLMAN: Well, she took a lot of her religious things like her candlesticks and prayer books and her clothes, which wasn't that much. My mother was extremely religious, extremely. And really that's about all that I could remember. Very protective, you know. LEVINE: Can you remember anything your mother told you about coming to America? GILLMAN: She didn't know too much. She didn't really know what she was coming to. But she was sad, you know, to leave. And, of course, she was happy to come to see one of my aunts, two of my aunts were here. Her sisters were here. So she, you know, so we were kind of happy to come. But, you know, you sort of any place where you, we did not have an unhappy life there. We were happy. So when you leave a happy place you're not so, you know, ready to go. So our trip, however, I remember being sick on the, we came like the middle class. I forgot what they call that. LEVINE: Second or third. GILLMAN: Second. Second class. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Well, can you remember anything that your father had said in letters that stuck in your mind about . . . GILLMAN: Well, my father was musically inclined. So he said to my mother, "If you want to do something for her, give her piano lessons." That was me. Because I, too, was inclined that way. So I had a little bit of piano lesson there, and then I came here and I had more. LEVINE: Let's see. And so no one in the family spoke any English when they first came here. GILLMAN: By one year you couldn't tell I wasn't born here. LEVINE: Really. Well, you had a good ear, I guess, and also for language. GILLMAN: Yes, I had a good ear. LEVINE: Let's see. Is there anything else about your life before you left that you remember, when you think about it? GILLMAN: The only thing, when I think back, is that I remember what the streets looked like. LEVINE: What was that? GILLMAN: That you didn't have too many streets that had sidewalks. And when it rained, man, you were walking in dirt for a lot of things like that. Those are the things I remember, the way the streets were. And it was raining, you know, full of mud. There were some sidewalks, but very few. LEVINE: Uh-huh. And can you remember, now, leaving for Roumania? What, how did you get from . . . GILLMAN: Czechoslovakia? LEVINE: Yes. GILLMAN: We took a train. LEVINE: A train. And did you leave, then, immediately, or did you stay for a while? GILLMAN: No, we stayed for, I don't remember, a couple of months, before we left. LEVINE: And then where were you staying then? Were you staying with family, or were you . . . GILLMAN: When we stayed there? Gee, I'm trying to think. No, I think we stayed in our house and we sold our house with the understanding that we would be leaving at a certain time. It isn't a big house. A small house. LEVINE: In Roumania? GILLMAN: No, in Czechoslovakia. LEVINE: In Czechoslovakia. But when you left that house and you went to Roumania? GILLMAN: Oh, well, we just stayed overnight or something like that, and then we left. LEVINE: I see. And was there much, I mean, did the steamship company have any kind of examination or anything like that? GILLMAN: Oh, yes. Everybody was examined. Not when we left, but when we came to the United States and Ellis Island, every one of us were examined. LEVINE: Well, let's say what was the trip like? What was the voyage like from Roumania to New York? GILLMAN: It was pleasant. Except my mother was sick all the way on the boat. I was sick partially. And my aunt, who came for us, she was terrific. She didn't have a sick day. But I remember being sick and vomiting, you know. GILLMAN: Now who was, say, who was traveling in your party when you left? GILLMAN: When we left it was the four of us and my mother and my aunt, so that was six people. LEVINE: Uh-huh. And did you know anyone else on the ship besides your family? GILLMAN: No. LEVINE: And were you in a cabin, then? GILLMAN: Yeah, it was a cabin. LEVINE: Were you all in the same cabin, or . . . GILLMAN: No. I think we were, like, divided. Four in, three in three, or something like that. We were divided. There were two cabins. I remember them very well. They were so tiny it wasn't even funny. LEVINE: And do you remember the dining room? Did you go to a dining room? GILLMAN: Oh, yes. I remember the dining room very well. And we were observant in kashrath. I don't know if you know that. We didn't eat any meat. So we were living on salmon and sardines and eggs and vegetables. You know, things like that. LEVINE: Now, did you bring food with you? Did your mother bring any food, or this was food that the boat supplied? GILLMAN: The ship had. LEVINE: Uh-huh. And can you remember, I mean, did you make friends? Were there other children on the boat? GILLMAN: Oh, yes. In fact, I remember very well because I was a participant. They had a Christmas party. It was Christmas time, and they wanted all kids that can sing or dance or whatever. You know, they had that kind of a thing. And I won, I won a huge, we called it a nigger-bot doll. I think I won either second or third prize. And I had never seen a black person before. So that was a very . . . LEVINE: Uh-huh. And what did you do to win the prize? GILLMAN: I think I sang. I had a cute little voice at that time. LEVINE: So it was a pleasant voyage? GILLMAN: Oh, yeah. I would say so, absolutely. LEVINE: And do you remember how long it took you? GILLMAN: Hmm. I think about fourteen days or something like that. LEVINE: And do you remember coming into New York Harbor? GILLMAN: Oh, yes. It was a very exciting and thrilling experience, you know. The Liberty, and to see that. And at that time I had studied a little bit, so I knew about the freedom and all that kind of thing. So when you saw that Liberty Bell or whatever it was . . . LEVINE: The Statue of Liberty. GILLMAN: The Statue of Liberty, it was very exciting. And it was also exciting to see so many people there. There were a lot of people on that board, on that ship, a lot. What's the name of the ship that is now standing, and a new one came up. It's like, it's in New York, I think. Oh, it's in California, and they made something out of it. They made a restaurant out of it. Because my son lives in California and we went to see. LEVINE: Was that the name of the ship, do you think? I can't think of it either. GILLMAN: If I would hear it I would know. LEVINE: There's a way to find out. We could do that if you want to. The other thing was do you remember your first impression of Ellis Island? GILLMAN: Well, I was very impressed by everything, because I'd never seen anything like it, so whatever I saw was great. You know, like, oh, you know, that kind of stuff. So my impression was very, very beautiful. And at that time, remember so many thousands of people came into Ellis Island. Of course, we did have a little hardship till we got taken care of, until we got out, you know. And the relatives were waiting for us, and we came directly to Chicago. LEVINE: I see. Now, how, do you remember how long you stayed, you spent at Ellis Island? GILLMAN: Maybe two days, something like that, not much more. LEVINE: And do you remember the sleeping accommodations that you had when you were there? GILLMAN: No, I really don't. I think we stayed on the ship there. LEVINE: Oh. Uh-huh. That could be. GILLMAN: The ship boarded there, and you stayed until you got your examinations, and then your family or whoever was picking you up, you left. But it took a long time because, you know, there were so many people. LEVINE: Can you remember the examination at all? GILLMAN: No, you know, they examine your heart, your lungs, your head to see if you had lice in there. Because there were a lot of people that came with lice. I never knew about that. And it was a physical, you know. LEVINE: Do you remember your mother saying anything or, I mean, was there any fear about maybe you wouldn't be able to stay, or any of that kind of a thing? GILLMAN: To stay in the United States? No. Because we were positive. My father was an American citizen, and we had the passports. In fact, I still have the passport. So, you know. So there wasn't any fear. With us it was a matter of, "Let's get out of here." LEVINE: Okay. So after you passed, you must have gone by boat to New York. GILLMAN: Yes. LEVINE: And then do you remember how you . . . GILLMAN: It was like a ferry boat, you know. That's what it really was. And they put in a certain amount of people into that boat, and then they landed in New York. LEVINE: And then what happened once you landed? GILLMAN: Well, once we landed our family was there to pick us up. LEVINE: Oh. And they met you there and then together . . . GILLMAN: We went to Chicago. LEVINE: And did you go by train? Did you go immediately then by train to Chicago? GILLMAN: Yeah. LEVINE: Do you remember anything about that trip? GILLMAN: That trip I also remember. It was such pushing. A lot of people went to Chicago, straight to Chicago. There was a lot of pushing, but it wasn't unpleasant, really. Just tiring. LEVINE: What was it like seeing your father after six years? GILLMAN: Well, I don't know how to explain it to you. It was a very emotional kind of a thing for all of us, for all of us. Very emotional, and my father was constantly crying. It was very emotional. That's all I can tell you. And then, of course, we had quite a family in Chicago. Two of my aunts, my mother's two sisters and her brother was here so it was, you know, a happy reunion. LEVINE: Now, was your father, did he have a place ready for you when you got to Chicago, or where did you stay then? GILLMAN: We stayed with our aunts for a little while, and he did get a place for us shortly. LEVINE: And he, what work was he doing when you first arrived? GILLMAN: Same thing what I talked about. LEVINE: Okay. And then did your mother work after she got here? GILLMAN: No. However, you know, we were a young family. But later on my mother took in boarders and things like that to have finances. Those were very popular things in that day, that you brought, if somebody came from wherever and they were looking for a place to stay you took them in and they paid a little bit, you know, not much. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Now, would the people, the boarders, tend to be people who had come from your country? GILLMAN: Uh-huh. LEVINE: So then you went to, did you go right away to school? GILLMAN: Yes. And I had a very unusual kind of a situation. My two aunts, that was my brother's, and my mother's brother's wife, and my mother's sister, did not have any children. And they owned a piece of property together, those two. And they begged my father and mother to let me stay with them. So I lived with them for about two years. Maybe not quite two years, and I was like an only child, spoiled, or whatever. But it was nice. They bought a piano for me and the World Book and all that kind of stuff. It was a very nice experience. But then they wanted me to be adopted, so my parents said, "You've got to come home." And I used to see them all weekends, every weekend I would see my parents. LEVINE: But you were very close also to your aunt. GILLMAN: Oh yeah, yeah. LEVINE: What was it like going to school without knowing English and starting out that way? GILLMAN: Well, it just was like a little overbearing, but I really got into it very quickly, very quickly. And there were quite a few other children like myself who came and just started, so, you know, you fall into it. I was fortunate because I do have a good ear for languages, and so it was really not a hassle at any kind. I remember very well it was a portable school that I went to when I first came here. LEVINE: A portable? GILLMAN: Portable. It was a portable. Not here. It was not a regular room. Do you know what portables are? Well, that's the kind of school that they had, portable schools, at that time. LEVINE: I never heard that for a school. I mean, in other words, it wasn't a building that was stationary? GILLMAN: There was one building, but there were so many people, an influx of so many people, that they had portables. LEVINE: Now, was it all, was it one room for one grade, or were there more grades all together? GILLMAN: First was one room for specific grades. Then they integrated them into, as you were climbing the ladder of learning you got integrated into the different grades. But it was mostly that it was one grade. It wasn't like having two, three grades, you know, in one room. LEVINE: And were the other children, did you make friends easily in school? GILLMAN: Yeah. Because, you see, there were so many like us. We were coming from the same background, so it wasn't hard to make, uh, but the interesting part was, that I think was that our parents never spoke a word of English. They wanted us to maintain our Yiddish in the house and speak English outside. It's just like the Spanish people do today, you know. LEVINE: And did they want to learn English from you? GILLMAN: They did. My mother went to night school and so on. She learned, you know. LEVINE: Your father must have been speaking pretty well. GILLMAN: Fairly well. Fairly well. LEVINE: And let's see, so then did you stay in Chicago for quite a while? GILLMAN: Yeah. The rest of my life. I stayed until I got married. LEVINE: Oh. And how old were you when you got married? GILLMAN: Twenty-three. LEVINE: Twenty-three, so . . . GILLMAN: I married a physician. LEVINE: And you had been working before that? GILLMAN: No, I went to school. I went to college and I did all that, but I also worked. LEVINE: What kinds of work did you do before you married? GILLMAN: Well, I did social service work, and I did different things, really. LEVINE: Uh-huh. So you actually went, I mean, that was quite something to go right through to college at that time. GILLMAN: Yeah. I worked hard. I didn't have the money too much, you know, so I worked part-time, and part-time I went to school. I went to Northwestern University. LEVINE: Uh-huh. And did you study a specific thing? GILLMAN: I was in social service, really. LEVINE: And then was your husband also someone who had come from the other . . . GILLMAN: Yeah. He came from Russia, but he was eleven years older than I, so. And he remembered much about Russia. He was only seven years old, and he could draw the picture of his home that he stayed in. And we went to Russia to see it, but we never saw it because it was all, after the war you know what happened. LEVINE: So how did you meet? Were you involved in a social club? GILLMAN: That's not how I met him. No. LEVINE: How did you meet him? GILLMAN: He was my sister's pediatrician, and I met him that way, not ever intending to meet him, just be, because I met him. She was in the office. He was taking care of her son in the office and I was there waiting for her. And that's how I met him. But I had nothing to do. LEVINE: So the neighborhood you lived in was . . . ( break in tape ) END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO LEVINE: . . . retained from living in Czechoslovakia. GILLMAN: I do want to tell you this, that over a year ago I went to Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia and so there were some parts of the trip that I had a very slight recollection of the town. Like, of Hungary I had, I was able to sort of connect things a little bit, and in Czechoslovakia the same thing. I was able, I went to temples, synagogues and different things, and I saw a little bit of familiarity. LEVINE: Was it good to go back? GILLMAN: At that time it was a very exciting, it was very, it was a nice experience. It really was. But I can't say that this experience was such a throw back of my childhood. It wasn't. LEVINE: Well, did you go back to the little town of Hust? GILLMAN: Yeah. It wasn't there any more. LEVINE: Oh. GILLMAN: I went to the area and they told me where it was at and so on, but it's not there any more. Well, you know, how many people perished and all these things. It was just unbelievable, what has happened there. I don't mind telling you something else. Right after the war in 1956, I believe, '54, we went, my husband and I took a trip and we went to Hungary, to Vienna, Israel and so on. And at the time in Vienna, that time right after the war, so to say '54, it was still, it was just, you felt you were walking on human lives wherever you were at. It was very, very tough. LEVINE: Well, is there anything that you can say that, I guess any changes that you remember in yourself when you got to this country? Is there anything . . . GILLMAN: Outstanding? Not really. The only thing that was outstanding, the emotional-ness that I had with my father. That was really outstanding. I will never, never forget it. And I think that left a very great impact on my life because I think that may be one of the reasons that I retained so much of my cultural Judaism and so on, because of him being connected with that. But other than that I really can't say that the connection is that great. But I do have little recollections like travelling from Czechoslovakia to Roumania for visiting. And that left something, and I can sometimes visualize it. So other than that, I don't know how much more I can tell you. LEVINE: Okay. Is there anything else you'd like to say about coming here, being here? GILLMAN: Well, I can only tell you that as years went on I kept on saying how lucky I am to be in this wonderful country, really. I saw all the freedom and all the educational things and as I got older I said to myself, "How many people have had these opportunities where we came from to get this?" We forget it was like, and we're talking about the grammar school and high school that was free. In Europe you had to pay for that. I remember when my sisters went. My older sisters, two older sisters went to polgar. It was like high school, or stuff like that, and they paid. Absolutely. So this was, and I tell you, many times when I hear these terrible things happening I say, "It's only by the grace of God that I wasn't one of them." So you know what I'm talking about. Other than that, I love this country without a question. And every time, and I've travelled quite a bit out of the country. Every time I come back I say, "Oh, it's so wonderful to be back." LEVINE: Well, that's I think a good note to close on. GILLMAN: Yeah. I think so too. LEVINE: And thank you very much. GILLMAN: You're very welcome. You certainly hit a very good time. Your timing was super. LEVINE: Great.