NASH: Okay, would you like to tell me when you came? GOLD: Yes. I came in 1914. While we were boarding then the ship. See, when I left my hometown, we knew that the war was in the making, but it was still not in full force, but when we came to the port to take the boat to come to America, the war broke out already and they stopped young men of age that they were supposed to serve in the army. NASH: This was in Russia? GOLD: Yes, I came from Russia. Anyway, so it was a lot of excitement and hundreds of families came to the port without reservations on the boat because maybe from the different cities, wherever they came from Russia, that the war was already in full swing. But the port where I left, Liepaja it was, Latvia, so people came. They figured they will take a chance and they will come to the port and maybe they will be lucky to get on a boat and then run away. But they did take in some passengers on unreserved. Whomever they had to say, you know, it was such a terrible tragedy if I think of it like it was yesterday. But while we were getting on board, they stamp our passports. I mean that is the time we have to present our passport, you know, for travelling. And although the documents, you know, the tickets of the ship, whatever it is, and then they start throwing all the luggage in back from the boat for those that they--the whole army outfit came to see how many single men are on this trip to America, to take them back. That was the order of the government at that time. And a great deal, I can't exactly give you the number, but a great deal because according to the trunks and luggage that were thrown back from the boat, like a baby. I was not a baby anymore, I was old enough to understand. NASH: How old were you? GOLD: I was 21 years old when I came. And, you know, the fact that we sought to see what was going on because I left an old mother. She was supposed to come after me, and a sister of mine with a young child came to visit her parents in Europe, and so I was so excited and I was crying. I said, "I want to go back home. I want to be with my mother," Because i left her, you know, she was there with another sister of mine. Finally, I cried and I came to myself and it took a long time until the boat pulled out of the pier. And the captain of the whole arrangement, all the officers were running so wild, so mad, you know, because they knew they had to reach the German waters and they are going to be in danger. So they didn't do it, they should proceed the trip and take a chance to stay here and be destroyed because they would be just as destroyed as any. So finally they decided that they will keep moving, so the passengers were not supposed to know. The reason I know it, not because I am smarter than anybody, but here were a bunch of young people, girls, and we sent the wireless telegraph, they had the wireless telegraph office on the boat, and young fellows were working and the severe flirting with them, and we tried to fish out the truth, what is going on. I mean he made a joke of it that we didn't know anything. You know, we played, but we wanted to find out maybe though them and they were not supposed to reveal any secrets that we are at war, and you know, maybe I attracted him or something, he said, in Russian, "This is a great secret, don't tell anybody, we are at war, but we have to continue traveling." So, of course, rather than leave the for myself,I felt that I didn't have the heart of attack carrying that secret, It was a miracle because I happened to be a very strong person and finally when we came--when the passengers noticed that something was wrong, they saw that the captain was very, very upset, so some people paid attention and then noticed that something was wrong, but still, they did not know exactly what is going on. We passed like from this Latvia port, we (?) to Copenhagen and then we have to continue through the, to pass the German waters, like whatever the geographic line--I never went to school, period, so I didn't know exactly, but we had to pass the German waters and that's where we got into danger. And I see there is no more lights on the boat. It was a tremendous big boat and only the light was on the very bottom deck. They couldn't be exposed on the outside. And my boyfriend, I mean he used to be friendly with me, this telegraph messenger. He said, "Now we are going through a very, very horrible place. The submarines are hunting for us." Such a stupid guy, why did he have to tell me that. But I mean my nerves were stronger that they are now, but still I was--and when everybody began to see what are we living in the dark. I mean instead of eating in the dining room with windows out in the ocean, the old was down in a place without light for certain meals like in the daytime when we didn't need lights period. And it was a horrible trip. So we went 18 days until we got lights. The name of the boat was Dwinsk, Russian-American Company. And then we hear again until we pass the danger. I mean first we were, any minute in the day we were to be destroyed by the German submarines. But somehow either they missed us or we missed them. I mean it was just a lucky trip that we survived in this trip. And this was the last boat that left Russia. And those hundreds of people that remained on the dock when we pulled out. I'm trying (?) the memory, the tragic part of that. And the screams and the cries, you know, they remained without transportation and we have to go back to their hometown, wherever they came from. Then again, it started to be passed already, the danger reaching Canada, quite far from Canada yet. So the American Government refused to let in this boat because it was a Russian-American Company like, so they refused to land us in America. So then they negotiated with the Canadian Government, that is Canada and then from there they were planning to send us by train to various cities, for instance, I was coming to New York, people to Chicago, and various cities of the United States. So it took about many, many, about 24 hours and finally they succeeded to beg the Canadian Government to let the boat park and see what they can do with the passengers. NASH: What city was that? GOLD: Halifax. So then already we were in the came to the balconies to see Canada and the first time I see a black man with a bunch of bananas, and well, you know, for European young people like I was--so we were already (?) of the danger that (?), but until we came to that port it is undescribable. You know, when you live in fear every minute of your life you refuse to be shot down. And so then the Canadian Government, and the captain from our boat and his officers, whatever crew there was, was through the Canadian Government they succeeded to let that boat get into New York. And they zigzagged us from Canada to New York and I still wonder how that tremendous size of steamship, it was zigzagging like a toys playing, you know. It took them three times, four times as long as-- NASH: Why was it zigzagging? GOLD: They just made it, just a (?) for this company to whatever, I don't know what was their reason to make them understand, whatever it was. So finally, we came in, I was supposed to arrive like on a Friday, no, on a Thursday, I'm sorry, on a Thursday, and came in much later than we were supposed to so my brother was supposed to meet me. And somebody mislead him and he said, the passengers will not be let off the boat until tomorrow morning because it was after 3 o'clock so they will have to stay overnight on the boat and tomorrow morning they will send some to Ellis Island, some to different--but I was, see they didn't have my reservation. I was supposed to come third-class, but they put me in second-class. So I had my (?) in second-class. So the second-class passengers, they let off regardless of what time it was, but my brother took for granted that they told him that they wouldn't let anybody off, and he had to come from Newark, New Jersey to claim me, to be responsible for me. So he took his train whatever, his (?) and he went back home. And then he came Friday morning which I wasn't on the boat yet. They took us out somewhere on East Broadway like, I don't remember exactly if it was the HIAS or another organization that took care of the immigrants until somebody came and was actually responsible for them, and especially like a single girl like me, you know, even for any other people it was the same procedure that if a person came to America, should find somebody that should give her a home and be responsible until you get organized sort of, to say. So my brother came and they wouldn't let me go to my brother because his wife was in Europe. So he was all by himself, lived with somebody which to their rules he couldn't be responsible to give me a home, I mean, it was foolish, but still. So I have the brother-in-law there also, and, of course, he was a family man and he had some 59 relatives there, relative people that he worked for them in this country, you know, he was only a super in an office building, but still he had a home and my sister, my older sister, and this relative had to give his signature that he's responsible for whatever happened to me and that he is responsible that I am in good hands. See, my brother-in-law was a poor man with a big family, he had nothing to show, no bank books no nothing to show that he is well enough to support another person in case I become a burden on them So this was the story of when I came to America. And that (?) the first I came with my sister in a small foreign apartment, cold flat, no nothing yet. She had five children of her own. I felt (?), I mean, she had so much work and so much to be responsible for. First thing I was a young, strong girl, a healthy one, so they keep me, I'll still have a home even if I have to sleep on a folding bed, wherever they place me because I couldn't look for work. I had to learn something, have to say hello in English or something. I mean, I grasped a few words, but until I look around where I am, what's the country like. So my brother said, "No, no, no, you'll stay with us. Whatever we have it's your home until,"--do you understand Jewish? They say, until you wouldn't be a greenhorn anymore, you know, that you will be able to speak a little. And so then we will let you go out and we will help you find a job and you will be independent. So I have a listen to them, I had no alternative, but a couple of girls 20 years old, I think I can do something and earn a living, you know, I thought so. So I stayed with them. NASH: Where did they live? GOLD: In Newark, New Jersey. So I stayed with them about a year and a half. Then I had cousins in New York, over in Brooklyn, New York, and they were here already a few years before in America. They were the Americans. So one of my cousins, also senior girls,she was older than me, and she worked in a shirt factory on 94th Street and 1st Avenue in the firetrap, in a wooden building on the fourth floor. Every time you walked about 150 people had to walk three times a day there and that building wouldn't break down without a fire. I mean, it's so descriptive because it was like yesterday. Regardless was so many years back. So she took me up there and they told me how to handle the machine the first thing, so she helped me, she was a great help to me although she worked in a different section that she couldn't do that work that I did, but they always had somebody to--and I grasped the idea how to handle the machine quicker than others. The boss was very happy he has got another slave. Yeah, I mean, in these times. I happened to be a (?) since I was born, I mean, in that respect. But when I came up a hundred machines were running. It was summer time, it was the second winter and the second--not quite two years later when I was in this country. And that roar of the machine constantly without a stop, you couldn't hear what anybody was saying. So finally, he put me near a girl, but he asked her to show me how to do the easiest part of shirt like, to make the backs of the shirts, for instances, which was the easiest part to do. And I began to shoot bundles, believe it or not, I just couldn't believe it and the boss was thrilled, I mean he was saying in our Jewish to his wife, his wife was sitting and watching that nobody should turn his head in the side just--so he says, "Oh, yeah, this is a , you know, in Jewish." So I said, " or not , I have to do something to him, I am leaving." I couldn't expect my cousin to keep me for nothing. She had a big family and her sister is there. So I worked and I made two and a half dollars a week first, from seven to seven, six days a week. In those days two and a half dollars was also nothing, but being my cousin, she didn't charge me for rent. And I told her, I said, "I wouldn't dip a spoon in your food if you wouldn't get paid for it," Because I knew that she was a poor woman. Her husband was a customer peddler, whatever it is. So she says, "Alright, dear, you'll pay me whatever." So then gradually I starting bundles, I learned every part of the shirt. And the highest salary that I made in that factory was five and a half dollars. And those shirts they used to make, maybe before you were born, I can imagine so, they used to make silk shirts striped with double cuffs, and they were very expensive, but the work was so cheap, I mean, that's how they could use the shirt, they got actually nothing for that. But anyway, so I said to my cousin, "This is America?" You know, figured you worked so hard so you produced, you know. I wasn't too clever, but I was not that foolish or stupid to realize how many dozens, tens of dozens a day if I make, of course, when I made the whole shirt, you know they teach you to make it in case they are short on help. One should know to make the whole garment . And so that I became an expert. I was sitting next to the top operator there, that he was his . And they were jealous of me, "Look at that, he's an Italian tailor, look, look, greenhorn, and she makes good, she makes so much work." So then at that year they are starting to organize the shirtmaker business and the ladies sportswear, they used to wear, the school girls used to wear middy blouses which they have them now too sometimes.. And these things, you see,we are starting to organize because this was the most enslaved work that existed in those days because there was no union then. So, naturally the organizers used to come around in the shops and try to speak to the workers, look if you join the union we will have a union and you will make more. You wouldn't have to work 12 hours, you will work 8 hours and you will make more money. So I said, "Gee, that's a wonderful thing," I mean, I accepted that, although I didn't know exactly what a union meant yet. But finally, the whole industry was on strike like, of course, they didn't take down everybody, but whomever they succeeded to take down from hundreds of factories in the city throughout the country, but mainly in New York. So then they came to us because that place was the most isolated section to organize this thing to a union. But finally, they had enough people in the union to come and follow all those sweat shops to organize because they knew how much people were working there for years and they didn't make much more than I did. NASH: Around what year was that? GOLD: Pardon me? NASH: The year? GOLD: The year? That was in between '16 and '17. So I figured like this, what have I got to lose. But I do if I wouldn't work in the factory I will scrub floors, I'll do domestic work and I will find out where there are some people needs the help and (?) and make nothing. So then, you know, I am a young lady. I have to buy myself clothes, shoes, I mean, luxury is out of the question, but necessity. So I said to myself, of course, I didn't have anything in my old country but I figured if you come to America and you work and you make a living, you have enough of what you need. So I was very disappointed and beside the aggravation that, here i left my mother, she was supposed to come after me with the next trip because due to my sister, the papers were some delay and they wanted me I should go through because in case, you know, it was a lot of stiff examinations. See, I had trouble with an eye (?), so they were afraid maybe they wouldn't let me pass. See, in those days, it was very strict. NASH: What was the matter with your eye? GOLD: I don't know, I had an infection and they didn't, one of the doctors said, that they wouldn't accept you on the boat, I mean, the doctors before you go on board, they have special checkups there by specialists, and they might find something wrong with a lot of people. So my sister said, "Look, now that the doctor says you could go, go ahead and we will follow maybe the next boat or the...," but unfortunately the war broke out and they were stuck there for eight and a half years. NASH: Eight and a half. GOLD: Yes, so anyway, so I said, "What do they accomplish, there I left my own mother and here what am I doing here. I see America, of course, it is nicer than the place I left." And then the police said there were no pogroms here. And there were other hardships that we went through. But then after we went on strike, not all the workers, of course, but the majority did go down. And we organized the shop and then they make the price, you know, the union leaders. So much for this and so much for that. NASH: What union was it? GOLD: It was the, I don't remember, it wasn't the Amalgamated, I guess I don't remember from like shirts and sportswear, cotton mostly. I don't remember if it was the, it wasn't the Ladies Garment Worker's Union because the Ladies Garment Worker's Union was dresses and all the other manufactured items. And to make the story short, here it was, we settled the strike, we came back to work. At first I gave a few scabs a good punch from time to time. I mean, I realized that people are fighting for us, they wanted to better our conditions and this ignoramus is sitting there and they don't, they became the bosses stooges. The boss used to bring them up lunch and the boss used to take them home in the car and the boss protected them, the police and everything else. So we got mad and we gave them a little here and there. So finally, we settled the crisis. So at least the first week I made eighteen and a half dollars. Worked eight hours, Saturdays a half a day. So you see, it's, but it's also, I mean, it didn't last too long because they started taking out all the industry in country places, see they didn't want to deal with the union, you know, they wanted to be their own bosses that they didn't want the union should to control them, tell them what to do, so they started taking out most of this into country places like 50 miles away from New York, wherever they could find and build up land there and get again cheap slaves there to work. And it went on so I had to look for a job again because--and the time was very bad. People were without work and it was no milk and honey in those days, but somehow I was struggling from one place to another, then another. Then another friend of my cousin was working a dress shop so it was slow. She wanted to take me in and teach me how to, she wanted to work with me. She would teach me how to make certain parts and she will do the complicated until I learn. And I was starving actually until I started to speak the language a little bit better. And the reason why, I didn't have any schooling where I came from, and then here I didn't have a chance because I used to work so late. i used to come home, and night school, where I lived, in the section where I lived, they had public school, but they didn't have night school in that... NASH: Where was that? GOLD: I lived in Harlem in New York at 114th Street, you know, between Madison and Park. And so that school in that territory there was no night school like to go in to night school and learn something. And that's how I struggled until I became Americanized somehow. NASH: When did you become a citizen? GOLD: Well, I became a citizen very late. I became a citizen in 1942. Perhaps I was disillusioned, I wasn't excited, I mean. See, I come from a small town. We had no schooling. We lived through such horrible times. Children grow up like wild weeds with no industry, you know. At that time Jews, one percent of the Jewish population were allowed to go to public school and even the one percent didn't have a chance to do it. And my family except my two brothers, they build, it wasn't a public school, it was sort of a private school like by some philanthropist, I don't remember it was, that they give a chance to, as many children as they could accomplish, it wasn't on a big scale. So locally my two brothers were lucky enough to get into those schools and the rest of the family, we were four girls, none of us had schooling. We were wild kids, I mean, otherwise what (?). So when my brother used to come from school he used to teach us the alphabet, the whatever, you know, whatever he already was learning in school, he taught us how to write our names, whatever it was, but this was our schooling. And then the pogroms. I still remember when they raided the building and then they destroyed the (?) and they came into the houses, whatever they could drag. And then the first thing they used to tear up all the pillows. And that was the conditions we lived under, the Czarist Russia along with the Czarist Jewish... NASH: Did that happen often? GOLD: It happened quite often. Sometimes it happened on a big scale. But I remember expression, I mean, in the Russia, "You dirty Jews, you should don't stay any longer." Russian expression. And it was very tough, very tough. For a big family, and then my father how do you make enough to feed us because we didn't make much at all. And then, naturally that's how you started to emigrate. You see, first my older sister came because my brother-in-law, he escaped from the Russian Japanese War. He didn't want to get killed and leave a wife with two small children so he was the first one that, he ran away from Russia. Then he took my sister over and the children. And we started emigrating one by one because they didn't have enough money to send for everybody at one time. And one of my brothers came and then another sister. And one by one they came to this country. And I was the last immigrant in the family. NASH: And your mother? GOLD: Then my mother came almost after nine years they finally broke through, two miracles they got here because they still couldn't, my sister was a very brave woman. She says, "I don't care, it couldn't be worse than I am now." But she says, "I have to come back and bring my son back to his father." And too, some agencies they established that they used to find way and means, see they couldn't get passports to come visit the boat, but she took a chance and to some, there is a lot of agencies in those days, she was selected with a more or less decent boat. NASH: Do you know the name of it? GOLD: No, I can't think of the name. And they helped her pass the border like from Russia to Poland, from Poland to, I don't remember from what port they left. I think from a German port. The Grimmen or Rotterdam, something like that. I don't remember what port they left. Somehow she succeeded to come with my mother here after that horrible (?). It was a miracle her being there during the war and that they came here. And then I became already self-reliant as the years went on, and struggled for a job here, a job there, and tried to find a social life in this country as much as I could. NASH: What was your social life like in the beginning? GOLD: Well, not much years ago it was, they used to have like now they call dances a ball, every Saturday there was a ball, and where you meet young people you came to a ball. And I had some nice girl friends over here I got acquainted with. NASH: Where did you go dancing? GOLD: There was, while I lived in Harlem there was a it was also House and they had a hall for dances like. So that was like, and being I lived near 5th Avenue, the Central Park is only a block away, so I got You know, meeting young men, you know, just to--we used to come and then we would co into on 99th Street there was a big lawn. And there was a lot of victims like me, I mean, people that they recently came from Europe, and jolly, jolly people, jolly young men, and girls singing and they had a lot fun. And sometimes go to a movie once in a while, you know. In the later years I became--I love music and I became very much musically inclined. And I used to go to a concert and years ago it wasn't that expansive as it is now. And I worked and I stayed for a long time, my cousin didn't let me move from her. She wanted, she said, "Where will you go, a single girl to live for yourself," but finally I saw it's too crowded and it was uncomfortable and I felt I could afford the rent that I would have to pay and to the (?). So some neighbor of my cousins recommended me a nice family, and she was just like a mother to me. She used to make meals for me and for all that was six dollars a week. With delicious suppers and everything else. And then she treated me like her own child, she had two small children. And I felt, she says, "Don't ever leave because you have got your friends here, you can have company come. Feel like you are at home. It's your home now." She says, "Maybe we find you a nice guy ." I said, "Well, this we'll see. I have time for that." But that's how we spent our social life, but later, in later years when I became older, and I like music, I used to go to concerts. Also then I began to choose my circle of friends, I mean, they should be my type of people, although I was little bit illiterate, a little bit ignorant as far as schooling is concerned, but I made the grade somehow. And then I wasn't so anxious to get married and then become a wife because I wanted to have my freedom and enjoy living good because my teenage life I didn't know what life means. So then we had all kinds of experiences with nice fellows, I mean, I don't want to refer to some expressions, some jerks. NASH: Did you feel that your first years were very hard? GOLD: Very hard, very hard. See, they were hard in every respect because the trip alone, see, to leave as much as I wanted to leave that country to iron gates because it was just unbearable to live there. The , see before I eft, see, they blew up our little place where we lived in our own home. So we lived in a different city. NASH: Where was that? GOLD: That was the name of Pariosov. That's where (?) was born there the great Jewish writer. And my sister when she married she moved to a smaller town there about thirty miles away. And she said, "Now that you are left here with mama," she says, "we couldn't afford even the small rent to pay because we didn't have any means." There was no relative, no nothing, I mean, no work, I mean, my mother was not such an old woman yet. So my sister says, "Look, whatever you have," and my brother was a very good natured person, he says, "look, you come and stay with me and by the time you will be ready to go to America you will stay with us. And we will share whatever we have, you will share. We will help, something too my sister had the children, so they had no alternative. So they had to live in that one room house. It was supposed to be a one room house. And it's is from this chair like this then the sister and her husband and two children, they were small, my mother and I. And he had a man, you know, he was a blacksmith, my brother-in-law, so he had to have a helper to help him. A blacksmith couldn't work himself. Even he couldn't afford to pay the man nothing, but that man also worked for, just for room and board actually. He was glad that he could get that kind of a job. But my brother-in-law treated him nice. And all the people had to sleep in one room, no plumbing, no water, no nothing. When I think of it, it's just unbelievable that we lived. Now this town that I am speaking of, of course, it was destroyed by the time of the Second World War. to Hitler--it's another little story from, in my experience--so after I left I lost my sister, after two months, I lost my sister from the horrible effects like being a Jew. The mayor of the city, he wasn't even mayor, it was just an official in our small town, and he came out one day while I was there, and he said, "In 24 hours all the Jews should leave this town." So she got so hysterical she said, "Where will I go, what will I do with two small children." One was three years old and one was two years old. And here (?) whatever you made it was just enough to exist. And where will we go. So she got sick, she had a heart attack. Now finally, it affected her very much, but here the time was nearing that I had to leave, and I left in such fears, but finally the town people, even some gentle people, the rabbi, a rabbi and the priest and the whole, you know, from the community there, went to the governor with to present him the problems. He says, "What do you want from these people? They have lived in this town. Where will they go, what will they do?" So they finally succeeded to let them stay. So at least I left with a clear mind that-- NASH: Was this the town of Paroisov? GOLD: This was, no, this was a small town Brashovter. Now it's not far from the big city of Kiev if you have heard. It's Ukraine. And so after we left, we lost communications. From the time of the war, we wrote to them, they write to us and we couldn't get together and everything was lost I suppose. We couldn't communicate. So when the Second World War came with Hitler, they tried to evacuate as many people, especially children, as far off of the fronts. So they took my sister's two children they were already grown up because this happened in 1942, '40 year. And that age, that (?). So they evacuated them, but my brother, of course, he remarried a few years later because they had two small children to take care of. And he was stubborn to be evacuated. He says, "I'll hide out myself," you know, with his wife, and his wife had two children. So they were stubborn and they remained where they were and now they are lying by the if, you heard a place , the is a of hundreds of thousands of Hitler's victims. But these two children of my sister were evacuated down in the eastern part of Asia. And still you didn't...