LEVINE: Okay Mr. Goldman why don’t you say your name and where you were born. 

GOLDMAN: Well I was…my name is Israel Goldman. I was born in the city of Babruysk in [Unintelligible:0:00:17] they call it…that is the [Mrs. Goldman speaking in background ‘that means the state, the state’] the state of… [Speaks to Mrs. Goldman: ‘you keep quiet Diana’]. The state of [Misk]—its white Russia…right I didn’t really… 

LEVINE: Okay well now what year were you born? 

GOLDMAN: In nineteen hundred and two [1902].

LEVINE: And your birthday? 

GOLDMAN: July 14th. 

LEVINE: Okay so that makes…that makes you ninety-one years old today. 

GOLDMAN: I was in July, yes. 

LEVINE: You were ninety-one and today is May 17th 1994.

GOLDMAN: Yeah.  

LEVINE: And this is Janet Levine for the National Parks Service and I’m here in Brooklyn New York with Mr. and Mrs. Goldman. I’m going to speak with Mr. Israel Goldman first and then we’ll be doing an interview with Mrs. Goldman after this today. Okay well tell… did you live in Babruysk up until the time you left Russia?

GOLDMAN: Yes. 

LEVINE: What do you remember about it? 

GOLDMAN: Well it was quite a big town because there were two railroad stations—one on each end of the town—and it was a fortress town. I think if I’m not mistaken I think Babruysk is mentioned in the Napoleonic wars. Napoleon had trouble there on that Beresin; the Beresin runs through the town. So I read somewhere about Napoleon having real troubles there and because he came there in the dead of winter and he had a job crossing the Beresin. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Do you remember the Beresin as a little boy? Do you remember anything about the river? 

GOLDMAN: Yeah I remember the bridge. I went over there it was like a footbridge not exactly…well no it was more like it…it carried the traffic too. It wasn’t one of those very big bridges, you know. It was just a flat bridge like…it carried all kinds of traffic. At that time it was not much horse and wagons you know. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm. 

GOLDMAN: And all around the area there it was like a fortress town. See and there was an area where there was like a…like earthworks you know that must have been used at one time or another because there was an arsenal in that area and everything. 

LEVINE: An [oslow]? 

GOLDMAN: An arsenal. 

LEVINE: Oh an arsenal. Uh huh. 

GOLDMAN: Yeah, and I used to go out there and play as a kid. It was like a rolling hills because it was like earthworks that would put up and lift it. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Do you remember what you played as a child? What kind of things did you do?

GOLDMAN: No I don’t remember what we played. I remember going there though and I used to…the town itself there was a…quite extended you know—buildings all around. At the time I was…we were leaving that same year, they were building a whole block of buildings and they were working on a brick quick and putting it up and we had one big…one big street that was called Nefsky [Prospect].

LEVINE: Nesky? 

GOLDMAN: Nefsky. 

LEVINE: Nefsky.

MRS. GOLDMAN: Like Broadway here.

LEVINE: Nefsky. 

GOLDMAN: And all the big merchants around…there was even a single machine company store there and there was hotels, there was a movie house. At that time I didn’t go to the movies. I was too young then but I remember there was a movie house and they had those [Unintelligible: 0:04:33] lights burning on the outside at night; they would light up the whole place. So I remember quite a bit of the town because as a child…I got Scarlet fever and I was taken to the hospital there. So we went down that street. There was a big church there and a cemetery and all that…so I can remember it was pretty extended you know not the…there was an area that…there was a fire at one time and the whole area got burned down. You know it’s so much to remember you know. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Do you remember about the Scarlet Fever? What happened when you got the Scarlet Fever? Can you describe it?

GOLDMAN: Well I was taken to the hospital and I was there for quite a while I think and finally I was brought home. 

LEVINE: Do you remember anything about the medical care that you got? 

GOLDMAN: No I don’t remember anything about that. But I do remember coming home once and being left alone in the house one time and suddenly I was alone in the house and the clock we got on the wall was ticking so…seemed to be ticking so loud. I got…suddenly I got scared [laughs] and had to go out of the house. So I…we lived in an area where there was like a…sort of a big yard…

LEVINE: Yeah. 

GOLDMAN: …and there were little places all around…cottages all around I suppose. 

LEVINE: Oh like a big courtyard? 

GOLDMAN: Yeah. 

LEVINE: With the big houses around it? 

GOLDMAN: Yeah. 

LEVINE: And what was your house like? 

GOLDMAN: Oh I don’t know to me it was just two…two or three rooms you know. It seemed big to me because I was only eight years old. 

LEVINE: Did you have brothers and sisters? 
 
GOLDMAN: I had…I had an older sister…two years older than I. 

LEVINE: And what was her name?  

GOLDMAN: Mary. 

LEVINE: Mary and what was your father’s name? 

GOLDMAN: Morris. 

LEVINE: And your mother’s name?

GOLDMAN: Rebecca. 

LEVINE: And you remember your mother’s maiden name? 

GOLDMAN: Uh…her maiden name was Okun O-K-U-N. 

LEVINE: And let’s see did you have grandparents? 

GOLDMAN: I had…we lived with a grandma…my mother’s grandma…father…grandfather. 

LEVINE: Your mother’s father. 

GOLDMAN: My mother’s father, yeah. 

LEVINE: What do you remember about them? What kind of people were they? 

GOLDMAN: Well he was a very religious man with a long beard and tall. And he was a shoemaker so he used to manufacture shoes. He used to buy the uppers and complete them…sell…sell the shoes all done. 

LEVINE: Where would he sell them? 

GOLDMAN: I…I don’t know. All I know is that he did the work. [Mrs. Goldman speaks unintelligibly in background]

LEVINE: Uh huh and what was he like with you? What was your grandfather like? 

GOLDMAN: He was very nice. We used to go to synagogue together. He used to take me to the…we had public baths. He’d take me to public baths and I attended an issue myself so it was quite a distance to walk and I used to walk to the [Yeshiva] there.  

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GOLDMAN: And I remember the walking home in the evening from the Yeshiva. It was quite a long walk. 

LEVINE: Were you by yourself? 

GOLDMAN: I don’t remember going with anybody, no. I must have been going by myself. 

LEVINE: And what would you see walking back through? 

GOLDMAN: I don’t remember [Mrs. Goldman speaks in background unintelligibly] it was more than a [Unintelligible 0:08:51] [speaks to Mrs. Goldman: ‘it wasn’t Diana’] it was a whole building of…with classrooms. 

LEVINE: Okay so you went to the…you went to the school at what age? Do you…

GOLDMAN: I must have started when I was six. 

LEVINE: Six so you were there for a few years… 

GOLDMAN: Yeah.

LEVINE: …before you left. And what were the public baths like? Can you describe it? 

GOLDMAN: It’s like the Turkish baths here. They used the same methods. They have the you know…do you know what a Turkish bath is? You ever been to one? 

LEVINE: No I haven’t. 

GOLDMAN: Well a Turkish bath is a system where they get…they heat up stones in one corner and every once and a while they pour water over the stones so it creates this steam—that’s the steam that’s used for… and you go in a steam room and there’s like shelves. The higher you go up, the harder it is you know. So you go up as high as you can and as much as you can stand you know and they used to take the…they had special...like a…it’s like a broom but its made from leaves that they washed themselves with. 

LEVINE: Oh. 

GOLDMAN: Then they use a bucket of water to pour to cool yourself down again, you know. It’s the same I saw here. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GOLDMAN: As a matter of fact we used to go to Coney Island here with my brother-in-law. 

LEVINE: Well how often would you go? 

GOLDMAN: You’d probably go once a year…once a week. 

LEVINE: Once a week and how long would you stay there? 

GOLDMAN: Oh I don’t remember. I was only a child and my grandfather used to take me home again after that. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and do you remember your other grandparents? 

GOLDMAN: Yes there was my father’s mother—used to come to visit. 

LEVINE: What do you remember about her? 

GOLDMAN: Only that she was a nice woman and she was very small. She seemed to be smaller than everybody else and she was very much…she liked me very much because she asked to the railroad station when we were leaving for America and she gave me a ring of little bagels, tiny little bagels for the trip. 

LEVINE: Did she bake them? 

GOLDMAN: I don’t know. No I don’t think so. I think she bought them. I don’t know. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GOLDMAN: But anyways that’s the only…those bagels were the only thing that kept me going because I couldn’t eat on the ship. I was very, very sick. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Well is there anything else…you said you were a religious family? 

GOLDMAN: My grandfather was religious yeah. He used to synagogue every day practically. But I used to go with him on the Sabbath. 

LEVINE: And what about your mother and father? 

GOLDMAN: Well my father left when I was only two and a half years old. 

LEVINE: So you didn’t remember your father until you came here? 

GOLDMAN: No I didn’t remember him until I came here, no. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Well how did your mother manage once your father left for America? How did…did she work? 

GOLDMAN: Yeah she had to work. We had a hotel there and she used to work in the hotel, house cleaning, I don’t know what she did, and I guess my grandfather did his work so we were support. 

LEVINE: I see. Uh huh and were you close to your sister Mary? 

GOLDMAN: Yeah we got along very well until the very end. She only died about a year ago. She was ninety-one. 

LEVINE: So what else? Is there anything else…how about food. Do you remember any of the kinds of foods that you liked when you were a little boy in Russia? 

GOLDMAN: No I liked everything I ate. I never discriminated against food. 

LEVINE: And did you…do you remember like…what would be like a typical day in your household when you were still in Russia? You’d go to the Yeshiva and then you’d come home and what? 

GOLDMAN: I guess we had our dinner and…I don’t remember what.

LEVINE: Did anybody ever tell you stories? Do you remember any? 

GOLDMAN: No. 

LEVINE: How about music—was there anybody who played any instrument or singing? 

GOLDMAN: No, nobody that I know of. 

LEVINE: What are your fondest memories of when you were a little boy in Russia? Are there any things that when you think of them you remember them?

GOLDMAN: Well I remember one time, I don’t know how old I was but I went out and I got lost—that was before my father left for America—he was gone to work somewhere and I walked out to look for him and I got lost and somebody else brought me home. That’s the only thing I can remember being carried on somebody’s shoulders. 

LEVINE: What was your father doing for work when he was in Russia? 

GOLDMAN: He was a scribe. He used to write Torahs. He worked for a firm that had a couple of men working—each worked on a different Torah. So he was one of them. 

LEVINE: Was that considered a very good position to have? 

GOLDMAN: Well I don’t know really. The funny thing is this when he came to America, they had occasions when they asked him to come and write and he didn’t want to do it. I guess he didn’t like the work. 

LEVINE: Hmm well is there anything else...you said that your father left for America to avoid going into the Russian army. 

GOLDMAN: No you see he was already…he already served in the army the five years they’re supposed to serve, and then the Japanese War broke out—the Russian Japanese War. And he was called back in reserve and he didn’t relish going back into the army after serving five years. He thought he did enough for his country and wanted to get out. So somehow he got out. I understand that he had trouble getting out because he was caught on the border once or twice and was sent back. And the funny thing is this, I heard stories like he was home already…he was back you know and he was supposed to be still in the reserve you know, and he went with my mother to the office and collected his pay while he was trying to get out of there [laughs]. 

LEVINE: Interesting. So how about anti-Semitism? Were there gentiles as well as Jewish people in your town? 

GOLDMAN: Oh yes there were. There was a big church right around the corner from us. But I don’t remember being…I didn’t remember being any…having any trouble with anti-Semitism. I never had any…I don’t…I don’t remember having anybody that would be prejudiced to us. I don’t know. We seemed to be living pretty well. 

LEVINE: You don’t remember soldiers in your town or anything? 

GOLDMAN: Oh yes there were soldiers in our town because we had…we had barracks... we must have had a regiment of soldiers staying in the town because it was a fortress town as I told you. So there were soldiers there but they never bothered us. 

LEVINE: When your father was in the army, was he sent out of your town? 

GOLDMAN: Yeah sure. But he was in the army before I was born and I heard stories about him. My mother was very much in love with him and she risked going to the town where he was staying and she notified him that she’s there and he got out of the barracks there and he went A.W.O.L. to see her. That’s how I heard about it. I don’t know but I don’t remember any trouble with the…except one time when there was in nineteen hundred and five [1905] I think it was. I must have been about three. The Cossacks came to town. They heard that there were revolutionaries you know…there was an uprising at that time and I think they tried to make a revolution back in nineteen hundred and five [1905] and they came looking for radicals so they…I remember I was playing outside and somebody said something like ‘the Cossacks were coming.’ So I didn’t know what it was but they seemed to be so excited so I got scared and I ran to the door and they slammed the door in my face and I was left outside. Then finally somebody opened the door and let me in. But I was told later that the landlord that we lived with was a you know…he was something in the army before he retired so he had some influence and he walked out and they talked to the Cossacks and they went away.  

LEVINE: Did people talk about stories about Cossacks that you remember hearing, as you grew older?

GOLDMAN: Well evidently they must have because I heard they were coming I got scared like the others. Everybody ran indoors. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm. What kind of a person was your mother? What was she like?

GOLDMAN: Well I don’t remember too much about…well we got along pretty well because I was the apple of her eye you know because I was the only son you know and the other was her daughter. So we got along pretty well and I never had any trouble with her. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm. So how was it decided then that you would come to America? When was that decided and why? 

GOLDMAN: Well my father left in nineteen hundred and five [1905] and we came here in 1910 that’s five years later. 

LEVINE: Did he send you money? 

GOLDMAN: Well he had…she had two brothers here. One here in New York and the other in Boston and they pitched in and they sent for us. 

LEVINE: So it was your mother, you, and your sister? 

GOLDMAN: Yeah, yeah the three of us. 

LEVINE: And do you remember leaving the town where you lived…leaving Babruysk?

GOLDMAN: Yeah, yeah. 

LEVINE: And traveling to where you got the ship? 

GOLDMAN: Yes it was…we had to cross borders. I know we…I know we…I think we had to change at the German border… another different train. You had to get off one train and go to the other. 

LEVINE: Had you ever been out of Babruysk before you left?

GOLDMAN: No, never. 

LEVINE: So do you remember? Was it exciting? 

GOLDMAN: Oh wait a minute. I was out once. I was sent to an uncle of mine in another town. I don’t remember the name of the town. It was little—like a little tiny village—he lived in a house with earth and floors, there were no…he was…it was like primitive out there. I stayed there I think only a couple of nights. It was like also a little town somewhere near a river. I don’t remember the name of the town and then I came home. And the only time I went out of Babruysk that time I think. 

LEVINE: Well when you went by train to get the ship to America, you went over the German border and then you got another train? 

GOLDMAN: It must have because we went to… Amsterdam…not Am…yeah Amsterdam. We took the ship to Amsterdam. 

LEVINE: And were you examined before you got on the ship? 

GOLDMAN: I don’t remember. 

LEVINE: You remember the name of the ship?

GOLDMAN: Yeah, the [Newdom]. I think it was something during the war, the First World War. 

LEVINE: Do you remember anything your mother packed and took with you when you were coming to America? 

GOLDMAN: No. I don’t remember what she packed but I remember the ship. We came in steerage so every morning they’d chase us out on board. They had to clean up the place, they chased us out on board and I was very sick. I couldn’t take the voyage. My mother was the only one…my mother was supposed to be sickly one and she was the one who had the best of it. But I remember running around on the deck and we had some stormy weather and I got sprayed in the face on the deck one time from the wind and rain. 

LEVINE: Now did you encounter any different kinds of food?

GOLDMAN: Well of course I saw bananas for the first time on board ship and tomatoes. 

LEVINE: What did you think when you first saw a banana? 

GOLDMAN: Bananas well I…to me they taste good enough you know. As long as they taste good I didn’t care but tomatoes were a little hard to get for a while but I got used to that too. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and…let’s see so is there anything else that happened aboard ship that you recall? 

GOLDMAN: Oh the only thing I recall is that I didn’t feel good [laughs]. I was a very sick boy. 

LEVINE: Okay I want to pause here for a minute [Speaks softly: can you just turn that off?]

LEVINE: Okay so we’ll continue now and we were just talking about when you were on ship do you remember the boat coming into the New York harbor?

GOLDMAN: I remember seeing the Statue of Liberty for the first time. Everybody knew about that. Everybody came on board to look for it.

LEVINE: What were people doing?

GOLDMAN: Well everybody was excited on board you know. They came into the harbor and saw the Statue of Liberty and we knew we were in New York and we came to Ellis Island. I don’t think…I don’t remember if we stayed very long because my uncles came for us and they took us to…they lived in Harlem…one uncle, and I was taken for the first time on the…oh no the railroad station. 

LEVINE: What was that like? 

GOLDMAN: It was fun looking down and seeing the street beneath you know—all the automobiles and everything—my uncle pointed out all the different things as we came there and we finally came home there. 

LEVINE: Well did…what was your impression of Ellis Island? 

GOLDMAN: I didn’t have very much of an impression because I didn’t see much of it. We didn’t stay very long; we were taken right off.

LEVINE: Were you examined there? 

GOLDMAN: I don’t remember. [Mrs. Goldman speaks unintelligibly in background] I don’t remember at all. 

LEVINE: So when you got to your uncle’s house was that very different from where you had lived? 

GOLDMAN: Oh of course it was.

LEVINE: In what ways? 

GOLDMAN: Well first of all it was…this was a tenement house. So you had to go upstairs and the streets were different you know. I was in a little…I was in a town where the next house was quite a distance away…although the streets were wide we had…you know they already had electric lights in our town and they had a movie house and all that so it wasn’t too much backward but it didn’t resemble anything like New York of course. New York is all…different…bigger. 

LEVINE: Did you have…did you have indoor plumbing when you were in Russia? 

GOLDMAN: No. 

LEVINE: So that… was that new? 

GOLDMAN: Wait a minute. I don’t even remember. No I don’t remember. I don’t remember whether we had an outhouse or not. [Mrs. Goldman speaks in background]. No I don’t remember. 

LEVINE: Well can you remember anything about the tenement—where you were living that struck you at the time? 

GOLDMAN: Nothing in particular I used to go right downstairs and play in the street. I don’t know. We were somewhere near that… I think the…must be the railroads. I used to go past that. I don’t think it was an [elevator]. I think it was a regular railroad. 

LEVINE: Do you remember the address where you were? The street? 

GOLDMAN: No, no. Somewhere in a hundred and first or a hundred and second I don’t remember. 

LEVINE: So did you start school right away? 

GOLDMAN: I started school later when we finally got an apartment in [Bronsell] here. Our first apartment was on Blake Avenue between Rock Quarry and Osborne. So we stayed there with… I think a two or three family house and from there I was taken to school. 

LEVINE: Do you remember meeting your father for the first time that you…when you got here? 

GOLDMAN: I don’t remember meeting him the first time but I remember when we lived together though. 

LEVINE: What was it like being around…having your father around? 

GOLDMAN: Well…I don’t know what to say. He used to take me here and there and everywhere you know. We used to go together everywhere. 

LEVINE: Where would you go for example with him? 

GOLDMAN: He’d take me to the park or somewhere else, the playground. 

LEVINE: What was he doing for work here? 

GOLDMAN: Here he was…when I first came to the United States here he worked in a big jewelry store in the maintenance department. After that he finally got to work on buildings. He was a [hot] carrier. He did that kind of work—mix cement—do things like that. 

LEVINE: Did he like it in the United States? Do you remember anything he told you about being in America or anything like that?

GOLDMAN: No. He never told me anything about how he felt. 

LEVINE: How about your mother—was she happy she had come? 

GOLDMAN: She was at times and at times she wasn’t. We went through quite a bit of different conditions. 

LEVINE: Do you remember hard times when you were here? 

GOLDMAN: No. To me it wasn’t hard. 

LEVINE: What was school like compared with the school you the Yeshiva where you had been? 

GOLDMAN: Well to think…I went to school here and I liked it pretty well. [Mrs. Goldman asks in the background: ‘How long did you go?’] What do you mean how long did I go? I went to school until I was about…I think I was about thirteen, fourteen and I applied for working papers so I could go to work to help augment the income in the house so I went to work. 

LEVINE: Were you a good student? 

GOLDMAN: Mm average…not too… [Mrs. Goldman speaks in background unintelligibly].

LEVINE: What about learning English. You didn’t know any English when you first came? 

GOLDMAN: No. 

LEVINE: How was that for you? 

GOLDMAN: I think it was routine. You learned it and that’s all…because I don’t know to me it didn’t seem to be any trouble. [Mrs. Goldman says, ‘you learn in the street I guess.’] Yeah you learn in the streets. 

LEVINE: So when you got your working papers what did you do? Where…what kind of work? 

GOLDMAN: I got a job in a place where they made…back years ago…they made hat frames. They had frames and they sent it to the manufacturers and they finished the hats. So this was a place where they made frames. So they worked to the…

LEVINE: Were the frames part of the hat or they’re just what they used to make the hat on? 

GOLDMAN: They ended up being part of the hat. 

LEVINE: I see.

GOLDMAN: See they just decorated the frame. 

LEVINE: What were they made out of? 

GOLDMAN: Well they had two kinds. They had buckram that was weathered down and then pressed into shapes on the machines that had a cover…covered in steam and it brought out the shape—whatever they wanted—you know and they had wire frames that were made by hand. People worked with the wires and twisted them in to shape and tied them together. 

LEVINE: So did you work there a long time? [Mrs. Goldman says ‘no’].

GOLDMAN: Oh I don’t remember. I think quite a while. 

LEVINE: And then what? 

GOLDMAN: Well then I wanted to become a…I was more interested in machinery. So I got a job in an [arm] build repair shop and I was working on a build repair shop for quite a few years, and then my sister got married to a man who was a necktie maker. So he say to me ‘why are you going to a dirty job like that come all day. Why don’t you work for us and work on clean job?’ So finally I became a necktie maker and from there I remained until I retired. I was making neckties all along. 

LEVINE: Yeah how did you meet your wife?

GOLDMAN: Well she happened to be working in a place where I came to work to help out…it was in the season when they needed more work and I had to…I had been laid off on a job I had. I worked in the union shop you know. And I was laid off there so I was sent to this place, and the other…the place I worked in made a regular, long tie. But the place that my wife worked in made bow ties and the tie itself not the ready-made bows [Mrs. Goldman speaks in background]. So I got to work and that’s where I met my wife because she was working there too and I remained in the industry. Later on I tried to do contracting on our own and [Mrs. Goldman says in background, ‘you worked all the time’] with my brother-in-law and there I had to learn other things; I learned cutting and pressing, all the different parts. And I…I was able to do anything in the shop that was need so after I left him, I got a job in a union shop and I remained a cutter until I…until I retired. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Do you have children? 

GOLDMAN: Yeah I got two daughters. 

LEVINE: And what are their names? 

GOLDMAN: Well they were both in the educational system. They were both teachers. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm and what are their names? 

GOLDMAN: One is Nancy [Mrs. Goldman speaks in background, ‘Wilma’] and the other one is Wilma. Wilma is now in Turkey teaching English there with her husband. She took it for just one season so she’ll be through in July and she’ll probably home in September…August… 

LEVINE: Now tell me about the fact of being born in Russia and coming here as an eight year old boy and living the rest of your life in this country. Do you think having come from someplace else as an immigrant made a big difference, had any kind of effect on you? 

GOLDMAN: No I don’t think so. To me…as a little boy you know…you fit in wherever you are very easily. There’s no problems you know. The only problem I had was to go to school, learn. When I was old enough to go to work, I went to work, that’s all.  

LEVINE: What do you feel proud of that you did in your lifetime? 

GOLDMAN: Well I feel mostly proud of my children and my grandchildren because they are the real things that I’m interested in. 

LEVINE: I see. What is it about them that makes you feel good? 

GOLDMAN: Well I got a granddaughter that’s now living in…its called Broomfield, Colorado. And she’s a…she was a teacher here in New York because her mother’s a teacher and her father is a Principal you know. So she was a pretty good teacher here in New York and she went to…she had to go to…she was married to a man who worked for the [Bell] system. He’s a computer scientist so they induced him to go there you know these people will call you up and he was working in the Bell system in Jersey and he was asked to go to work there. So they paid for all his expenses and they went out there and now my granddaughter has gone into the educational system too. She got a job there as a teacher. [Mrs. Goldman says, ‘that’s the younger one’] That’s the one that’s in Turkey. She’s a lot older now. 

MRS. GOLDMAN: You want to know something she’s 5’7 and when they come in. I got grandson’s 6’4. Her husband is 6’2. I got a grandson—my other daughter—he’s 6’4 so you can just imagine. 

LEVINE: Okay so you feel proud that…[doorbell rings] 

MRS. GOLDMAN: Just a minute, I’ll get it. 

GOLDMAN: Its open Diana.

MRS. GOLDMAN: Its open! Its open!

GOLDMAN: So I’m proud of her because she’s really getting good marks there. She got into teaching there and they like her style very much and she gets all kinds of praises. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm good. 

GOLDMAN: So I’m proud of that you know and she’s got two little girls that are really out of this world. 

LEVINE: These are your great-grandchildren? 

GOLDMAN: Yeah and they’re so bright you know. The same thing happened with my older daughter’s grandchild too—another great-grandson—I got from the older one; he comes here; he’s just a delight you know. He knows exactly everything he knows…everything and he’s going to be seven and he just started in the first…I think he’s going to the second grade soon and he knows everything. He’s very bright so that’s the things I got to be proud of. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Uh huh. Do you…can you think of any things that happened during your lifetime that made a big difference to you? Whether they were political things or just any… personal or political...or any kind of changes that you lived through? 

GOLDMAN: Well we lived through all kinds of changes you know. We went through the Great Depression and we had pretty hard times during that time. I had lost my job that time and we had to do something ourselves we used to do some work at home and I used to do some…I even tried to contract some work out from manufacturers here and we found a store…and we installed a couple of machines and we did all kinds of work and there were some hard times during that time but we overcame it. So right now I think we did all right so far. 

LEVINE: Okay. Is there anything else you can think of that you’d like to say about your life or your attitudes or anything else before we close? 

GOLDMAN: Well what is there to say? I listen to the radio and I hear some of these guys like what’s his name? Bob Grant and the other guys and I don’t understand why these people are so vicious about the idea that we got a democratic president. You know they don’t call him by his name; they call him “slick Willy.” [Mrs. Goldman says, ‘slick Willy.’] You ever hear a thing like that? I never heard it in my life. We had Wilson, we had all kinds of presidents and I never heard anybody call them names like that or degrade then for any reason…anything he does is wrong to them.  

LEVINE: Do you…I take it you like Clinton as a President? 

GOLDMAN: I guess so. He’s doing the best he can. I think he’s doing a lot more than all the others having the nice big words and do nothing. When you finally get a president that’s trying to do something, soon you degrade him. He’s a radical, he’s a socialist, he’s a communist you know. To them he’s a communist. They don’t even know the word Communism, if they’d know it, they’d know the difference because…to them he’s supposed to be an ultra-conservative…what’s his name—that big fat guy? [Mrs. Goldman: ‘I don’t remember name.’] He’s always finding the truth; he’s finding the truth… everything is wrong whether a republican or a liberal does is wrong. You’ve got to…you’re not supposed to help the poor…

MRS. GOLDMAN: You think his name is Bob Grant? Grant? 

GOLDMAN: No Bob Grant’s another guy…but anything you do they seem to think government is there only for the rich people. If you do something for the poor, you’re a socialist, and that really burns me up. I never heard any such disrespect for an elected official.  

LEVINE: Mm-hmm. Did you become a citizen on your father’s papers or did you become one on your own? 

GOLDMAN: No I had to go on my own. 

LEVINE: Do you remember what that was like? 

GOLDMAN: Well yes we went to…we went to…I had to go to court and I was there examined by a judge. He asked me a lot of questions and all that and at the time I belonged to the I.W.W. no it was…not the I.W.W…

LEVINE: The garment workers? 

GOLDMAN: No it wasn’t…Workman’s Circle. Workman’s Circle was a fraternity organization. They wanted to know whether they were Communists and what did they said at meetings when they talk. I said what do you expect them to talk? It’s a fraternal organization. We talked about fraternal things. But anyways they finally gave me my papers. 

MRS. GOLDMAN: What do you mean finally? They gave it to you without complaint.  

LEVINE: Well did you feel…was that a happy day for you when you became a citizen or it wasn’t a big momentous event? 

GOLDMAN: Well I had a purpose to become a citizen. I wanted to vote so of course I was satisfied to get it. 

LEVINE: So have you always been politically interested with what’s going on? 

GOLDMAN: Well I always sided with the Democrats because I can’t see so far…every Republican has brought nothing but misery to this country. Hoover came in and he couldn’t…he was asked about something he says he didn’t read in the papers and didn’t know what happened and nothing happened. Roosevelt got in there and did something to turn the country around, when it was going down the drain. Truman did everything he could to turn the country around and these so-called Conservatives see that all as all wrong. If you do something for the people, it’s wrong. You got…you got everybody got to climb out of the dumps on their own shoestrings; they got…they’re not supposed to be helped by the government. What is the government for? It’s supposed to govern the people so its supposed to do whatever is necessary for people that need it. Although there are a couple of things that they did now that are completely wrong—this welfare reform—they better bring that around to something then maybe it might help. But now they have this stupid idea to put a person on welfare and that person found himself a little job and made a few dollars to cover the difference because they get so little. So they took out their money. They took out their wages. Isn’t that stupid? If people can help themselves a little bit more to get out of the rut they’re in… they shouldn’t bother them. So that was what was wrong with the welfare system because these people see that they take their money away from them, why should they go to work? They stay home and get paid and now the young people got the same idea. I heard the women say they’ll have a baby and they’ll go on welfare and that’s what they do because… now they are here in Jersey and they started a program of stopping the welfare on people that have other…more children but they could have helped them. For instance, mothers are…even if they wanted to go to the work, they couldn’t because they have the children to take care of. Why couldn’t the government have a place where a child can be taken so the mother can go to work? 

LEVINE: Okay well I think maybe we’ll close here.

GOLDMAN: Okay. 

LEVINE: And I want to thank you very much. You seem to remember a lot for an eight year old…

GOLDMAN: Yeah.

LEVINE: …coming to this country remembering your town and all that. 

GOLDMAN: Mm. 

LEVINE: Yeah. Okay well I’ve been talking with Israel Goldman and it’s the 17th of May… 

GOLDMAN: Yeah.

LEVINE: 1994. Mr. Goldman will be ninety-two in July of this year.

GOLDMAN: Yeah. 

LEVINE: And this is Janet Levine for the National Parks Service and I’m signing off. 



