LEVINE: Today is September 10th 1995 and I’m here in the Ellis Island Studio with Mr. Peter Goolkasian who was born Bedros Goolkasian in what was Turkish Armenia at that time on July 9th, 1910. Mr. Goolkasian is eighty-five years old at the time of this interview and this is Janet Levine for the National Parks Service and I want to say I’m delighted to be able to talk with you today and its lovely to see your whole family here with you.

GOOLKASIAN: Thank you. 

LEVINE: Let’s start at the beginning by stating your birthdate for the tape. 

GOOLKASIAN: I was born in Mezre, which is a little town next to the capital of [Harpet], which is also known as [Harpesh], or Harput in English. The Turks called the faith of Harput, Emuret–el-azig.

LEVINE: Can you spell that Mr. Goolkasian? 

GOOLKASIAN: E-M-U-R-E-T hyphen E-L hyphen A-Z-I-G and the capital name of the city is el-azig E-L hyphen A-Z-I-G. In fact after all these years, the Armenian name has disappeared from the place and the place is known as Elazığ.

LEVINE: Ah did you live in that place known as el azig up until the time your family

GOOLKASIAN: Yes.

LEVINE: …came here to America? 

GOOLKASIAN: My family is originally from Husenig, a [building] named as H-U-S-E-N-I-G and my father was a shoemaker; it’s not like shoemakers here. You go and he’d measure your feet; he’d show you the different styles of shoes, and you’d pick the one you want and in a couple of weeks he would have that ready for you. 

LEVINE: And what was your father’s name? 

GOOLKASIAN: My father’s name was Aharon. Aharon, which is Aaron in English. 

LEVINE: And your mother’s name? 

GOOLKASIAN: My mother’s name is Taguhi, which in English means Queen or Queenie. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and do you remember your mother’s maiden name? 

GOOLKASIAN: Yes. Der Mossighian. 

LEVINE: Could you spell that one? 

GOOLKASIAN: D- capital D-E-R capital M-O-S-S-I-G-H-I-A-N.

LEVINE: Uh huh and…

GOOLKASIAN: You know the ‘Der’ before every Armenian name means that there was a priest in their family. 

LEVINE: Oh uh huh so you had priests in your family? 

GOOLKASIAN: In my mother’s side. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Do you remember your grandparents? 

GOOLKASIAN: I don’t remember my grandparents on my father’s side because he was killed before I was born. He was killed by the Turks in 1895. My other grandfather, before I was born, came to America to see what there was here because there wasn’t anything over there for him. And he used to send money to my grandmother asking her to come. He had three sons but instead she sent two of her sons over but she never came until after the war. 

LEVINE: What memories do you have of your grandmother? 

GOOLKASIAN: My grandmother was with me all the time since the day I was born. She was with my…when we came over here she came and lived with us. My mother remarried here…remarried my father’s next younger brother, who my father had sent through college in the old country and sent him here, and in turn he sent me through college. 

LEVINE: Wow that’s beautiful. 

GOOLKASIAN: Yes. 

LEVINE: So when…can you remember any activities with your grandmother when you were a little boy, before you came? 

GOOLKASIAN: Yes I remember many things. I remember going through my grandmother’s house, which was in Kesserig. 

LEVINE: Could you spell that?

GOOLKASIAN: K-E-S-S-E-R-I-G, which was a village not to far from where we were and I went over with my mother one day and my uncle—my mother’s brother—was working on a swimming pool over there. He had dug an area for a swimming pool and there was a river going by in the back of his lot—in the back of his house. He put…dug a ditch and put piping, ceramic piping, from the river over; he damned the river so that the river…most of the water had to come through the pipes. It filled the swimming pool and the overflow went back into the river. He was a genius. He was…

LEVINE: Was that unusual for someone to have a swimming pool? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well it was unusual because people didn’t take to swimming like they do here. It was a…the area had no swimming pools; the nearest lake probably was thirty miles away but that wasn’t a thing—swimming. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GOOLKASIAN: Another thing…a time I remember going with my mother to my grandmother’s house. When she went in, she went into the house and I was on the outside, and my uncle had planted some beautiful plants you know and they were flowers, they were so beautiful. So I remember picking the flowers and going to my mother [laughs] and showing her, and she got so mad [laughs]. She didn’t know how she was going to explain this to her brother who loved flowers so she grabbed me and we [ran home.]

LEVINE: Uh huh. How about in the village itself, do you remember activities that people did or…? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well I remember Sundays. We used to go to church and church also lasted quite some time. It’s not like today where in an hour you’re out; it used to last probably two and a half, three hours. After church they’d all go out in front of the church and meet the families and talk and so on, and there were always some cold drinks that they were selling, and then candies for the…lollipop like candies for children you know. I remember that. Another time…the village…the area that I was born in…whoever lived there always got some sort of a sore in the face, on the neck or on the side [board] you know and it would fester up something terrible and I got it on my chin, and I was told by my mother that when I get it on my chin my grandmother on my father’s side felt so bad because the priest in Armenia always wore a beard. She was so concerned that possibly I wouldn’t be able to wear…have a beard. So she used to go to church everyday praying that I would have a beard [laughs]. It’s odd you know things like that.  

LEVINE: Yeah well now what was done for this condition?

GOOLKASIAN: Well its one of those things where once you had it, it never appeared again. 

LEVINE: Oh you were immune after you once had it. 

GOOLKASIAN: You were immune and even if you were a minister, you were from some other area that came there, and if you stayed there a week or more or probably more you would get it too. 

LEVINE: Oh.
 
GOOLKASIAN: And with me it’s on my chin but most of them they get it around here or on the forehead. So a lot of Armenians that you might see, you might see that mark. Its like a…

LEVINE: A birthmark? 

GOOLKASIAN: Yes and you could know they were born or they’ve been there [laughs].

LEVINE: Oh wow. 

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah it’s odd…its something have to do with some [germ] in the ground. 

LEVINE: Wow now do you remember anything…I know you were young but do you remember anything about medical care for…at that time? I mean were there…was there folk medicine? Was there… 

GOOLKASIAN: [Interrupts] Oh there was folk medicine. The family was oriented differently than here. The head of the family was the grandfather if he was living. If he wasn’t living then the grandmother would be the head of the family, and the sons would of course would be living in the same family.  If they had two sons, they were born…or married; they would live together. The whole thing as one unit but the grandmother was the boss. It was her duty to make sure in the wintertime there was enough food for everybody. So in the summer time whatever produce was made, it’s her job to make sure that some of it was prepared for the winter, so they could reuse it in the winter. They would take meat for instance—lamb was the thing they used—and they would grind it and they would spice it and they would make something like salami. But it had no fat in it like salami does—very little fat but a lot of spices—and this was dried in cloth bags, and when it was dry, it was taken out of the cloth bag and then wrapped and kept in a cool place and whenever they needed any…they’d cut a it—a piece here and there—and eat it.  It’s delicious. Even here today we do that.  

LEVINE: Oh. 

GOOLKASIAN: We still have that. 

LEVINE: Uh huh.

GOOLKASIAN: Another thing they used to do was whenever they got a lamb—a lamb was butchered twice a week—you knew just what market was butchering, probably Tuesday and a Friday. And you know if you go through the market that was butchering that day. You’d buy the meat that you want, generally a big piece, and they’d bring it and they’d cut up that up for different purposes, and out of it every bit of it was used. And bones were the…small amount of meat and the fat, the fat was rendered, the bones were put in that. But I don’t know what they did, they would put it in a crock and it would never spoil. And whenever they wanted to make—a [bulger] pilaf—[bulger] is made from wheat, cracked wheat, they would go and take a chunk of that with the bones and the meat and the fat, and they would use it for cooking—fantastic. They had their own method of doing things that they had been using for thousands of years. 

LEVINE: Well where would be the cool place where they would keep the things?

GOOLKASIAN: Well anything where the sun wouldn’t get at, anywhere. 

LEVINE: Was there a smoking of meats that was done? 

GOOLKASIAN: No, there was no smoking that I know of, no. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm.

GOOLKASIAN: But they had over there instead of observing birthdays, they’d have name days. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GOOLKASIAN: And every Sunday in the calendar was a name day for at least three, four, five names and if it was your name, you know, you would be honored that Sunday. Now I remember one time when my uncle from America had come, there weren’t Armenian women here in America. There were a lot of men. Well there were a few women got here, and they got married all right. But men, some men did marry non-Armenians but they weren’t too happy because the food was different, culture was different…so my uncle had come through Armenia to find an Armenian wife, which he did. And it so happened that when he had come over, one Sunday we went to church. It was our name day. His name was Paul and my Peter and both names are the same Sunday observance. So in church of course they named…they called attention to the people that was our name day and then at night I remember neighbors and relatives came to see us with candles. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm and what…what other kinds of observance was there of a name day? You’d go to church and then…

GOOLKASIAN: Well there are a lot of different observances. One other observance I remember was at night after supper, when it began to get a little dark, they would collect some, collectively, a lot of people together you know, collect some wood, dry wood, put it together and build a little fire, and when the fire was low—not too much flame—the elders would make a wish and jump over and that’s supposed to bring the wish through. 

LEVINE: In other words, they would make a wish for the person whose name day it was?  

GOOLKASIAN: …whatever…no.

LEVINE: No.

GOOLKASIAN: No, this has nothing to do with the name day.

LEVINE: Oh not the name day. 

GOOLKASIAN: No this is whatever they wish and they wouldn’t tell anybody what that wish was you see, and then they would encourage the older children to do the same but be careful about the fire. 

LEVINE: Uh huh.

GOOLKASIAN: Another time I remember. My father had some sort of a carriage, four great big wheels—they were almost as tall as I was at that time and handled at both sides. He was…and then a two-seater facing one another in the top. He would put my sister—two sisters—[Anahid] and [Barseni]—Barseni was a—Anahid was three years older than I. Barseni was a year and a half older than me, and on one side and me on the other side and then my father would push it fast and let go, and it would go by itself a while. Then finally he’d walk through it again and then push again. Another time I remember my father and I were walking down a street and we came to a willow tree so he reached up and grabbed one of the limbs of the tree and cut it off. And between the knots, he cut a piece off with a jackknife—about four inches long—and then he took the centerpiece, rolled it on his hands until the skin of the... 

LEVINE: The bark of the tree. 

GOOLKASIAN: The bark yeah...loosened. He took the wood out. I don’t know what kind of notches he made in it. He cut some notches in it and then he pushed the thing back into it and then made another couple of notches, and then started to blow and a beautiful sound came out [laughs]. 

LEVINE: Ahh. 

GOOLKASIAN: I was amazed [laughs]. It was a miracle for me.  

LEVINE: How about music? Do you remember any music or dancing or anything like that? 

GOOLKASIAN: There was always music but I don’t remember too much about that outside of the music in church—that was the main music. But they did have oh when my uncle that came got married, they had Armenian instruments which they called Davul, which is the drum, Zurna, which is like a clarinet, and [Lulug] is another one similar to a clarinet but its not made out of a small piece of wood you know and they used to play that and dance to it and I remember that. 

LEVINE: Uh huh.

GOOLKASIAN: Another time…I remember an awful lot of things. 

LEVINE: That’s wonderful. 

GOOLKASIAN: My father was a shoemaker but he also did some tilling. I don’t know what the reason for that was. But he had a field where, I remember one day, he had a big piece of flat wood. In my house we owned a cow and a horse. Well he attached the horse to the wood. He and I, he had plowed the area with the horse…he and I stood on the wood and we evened the field with our weight. It was amazing. It was very interesting. Another time I was misbehaving at home, and my mother got a hold of my father I don’t know how…to take care of me …to take me away [laughs] so my father had two people working for him. Over there you learned the trade by working with people that knew the trade and you didn’t get paid very much. But that’s how you learned. That’s like going to college.

LEVINE: How long would it take to learn to be a shoemaker? 

GOOLKASIAN: Two years possibly. Well anyway so he sent one of his men to pick me up and take me over and I remember he took me over and then he started to show me different things. He had a…I remember this definitely because when I came here, when I saw the Singer sewing machine, it came to me that my mother had one at home and my father had the industrial one in his shop. These were all foot operated. And he showed me the machine. Then he showed me the different shoes that he makes and then he showed me oh about twenty spindles and spindles have patterns of the shoes that he was making, and each one was different sizes and different styles. So all he had to do was take these out—patterns—put them in you know into shape and then it was ready to be sold, and then for the soles he used to take a big piece of leather and soak it in water and it would become more pliable and then he would cut out the pieces that he needed for it. 

LEVINE: Oh.

GOOLKASIAN: So I got tired so I remember he had a little balcony in the back and he took me to the balcony and I fell asleep and I remember he put a fur piece on top of me [laughs].

LEVINE: Oh. 

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah, a lot of things I remember like that and this was when I was around four, four and half years old.

LEVINE: Wow. 

GOOLKASIAN: Some of it is as back as far as when I was three and a half.

LEVINE: Really. 

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah.

LEVINE: What can you remember? What’s like one of your very earliest memories? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well my earliest memory was jumping over the wood is one of them.

LEVINE: Oh uh huh.  

GOOLKASIAN: The baby carriage thing was the other one because after that I had another baby brother born see, and when the massacre started, when they drove us out of our city, he was a baby and in a short time he died. 

LEVINE: Oh. Is there anything else you remember about rituals? About either birth, or marriage, or death? Any observances that you remember? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well the only thing is the wedding, which I describe very well in the book. But offhand I don’t…I don’t remember…

LEVINE: Mm-hmm.

GOOLKASIAN: …offhand. 

LEVINE: Okay. Well…

GOOLKASIAN: All I know is that my father used to live in [Unintelligible: 0:22:11] and he came to…his business was in [Unintelligible: 0:22:18] and it was the government center of the area and he built the house the same year that I was born. And we had a house two floors: downstairs was attached to a barn and a well fence with all kinds of fruit trees and in the back was another small building where he kept his horse. Oh I remember also we had a cow. In the morning a shepherd would go by the street, collect peoples’ cows, take them to the pastures, and then about four or five o’clock at night bring them back. And then of course mothers would go and milk the cow and they’d have milk for making cheese, making matzoon, which is the same as yogurt and many things from milk. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm. 

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah. 

LEVINE: Wow. Do you remember how the Armenian community was treated by the Turks prior to 1900?

GOOLKASIAN: Well as a kid all I knew was that it was safe for men going the streets all around in the daytime, alone. At night it was better that two men were together. But as far as women were concerned; women in the daytime, if they were in twos you know it would be okay but at night it was forbidden completely because anything could happen. You see Armenians were Christians. They were the first nation to adopt Christianity in 301 A.D.—this was twelve years before Rome even allowed Christianity. See they didn’t adopt Christianity twelve years later. They allowed it, which is quite different. 

LEVINE: We were saying about how the Armenian community was being treated by the Turks.

GOOLKASIAN: Oh at night a woman…oh as I was saying the Armenians were Christians—one wife, period and—but the Turks could have as many wives as they could put a roof over their head and a loaf of bread a day. That was their idea so most of the… to steal an Armenian woman and treat her as a wife and so on was a desired by them. 

LEVINE: Uh huh and did that happen? Did you ever know that to happen? 

GOOLKASIAN: As a child I don’t know. 

LEVINE: Yeah. 

GOOLKASIAN: As a child I don’t know. I know I read stories where they had what they called [genecary] system in Turkey for years. The first-born son of an Armenian belonged to the state. Right after birth it was taken and they had nursing mothers, professional nursing mothers, who took care of them—that became the property of the sultan of Turkey and when they were…grew up they became his soldiers to protect him and they had all kinds of freedoms that no one else had. And the Turks after a while began to get jealous and they wanted their sons to become…

LEVINE: Soldiers.

GOOLKASIAN: Soldiers for the sultan, and when they did, everything broke up. It didn’t work out and they had to abandon the system. 

LEVINE: Uh huh well was that system in operation in your lifetime? 

GOOLKASIAN: No. 

LEVINE: No so this was earlier. 

GOOLKASIAN: This was before. They had been there four hundred, five hundred years. This was prior to that but as far as Armenian women and girls were concerned, they were stolen left and right if you didn’t watch out and you never saw them again. They had them in their harems.

LEVINE: And this you knew…that was happening when you were a little boy? 

GOOLKASIAN: I guess it was but I mean...

LEVINE: You weren’t aware of it. 

GOOLKASIAN: I was too young. I wasn’t too aware. I know that we had to watch out. We couldn’t trust them anyway. 

LEVINE: Uh huh.

GOOLKASIAN: There isn’t a Turk today that hasn’t got Armenian blood. This has been going on five hundred years, and the church is the church when they first came, they were Mongolian people. They look differently than they do today. Today they look more like you and I.

LEVINE: I see. So did you have any friends in your town who were Turkish? Did you or your family associate? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well my father…my father…did a lot of work for the church. I’ll tell you between you and I. The church really…were bad but they weren’t the ones that were really interesting in massacring the Armenians—it’s the government—the government wanted a Turkey that was only [Unintelligible: 0:28:08] and only Turks. There were other nationalities like Jewish people but they didn’t say anything to them. They wanted to get rid of the Armenians. It so happened that when Turkey did business with other countries, their own people weren’t educated enough to do anything. And the bankers and the top-level people that did things for the government were mostly Armenians and a few Greeks so they wanted to get rid of them. They wanted the Turks to run that. 

LEVINE: Was there an education system in place that was different for the Armenians than for the Turks? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well Armenians got their alphabet in 450 A.D. Before that they had a different kind of alphabet probably more like the Egyptian or some other and they knew that they couldn’t do much with that. And when they became Christians they were using the Greek language mainly. So they wanted everything in Armenian so they sent priests to Rome and to Greece to study the languages and come up with an alphabet. And they came up with an alphabet of thirty-six letters and they wanted to make sure that there wasn’t any combinations necessary to make another sound like C-H and so on. So they were quite successful and in the years later—in the next probably fifty or a hundred years—they found two other sounds they could make but couldn’t write so they made two more letters. So there are thirty-eight letters in the Armenian language. And in general you can take most any language almost and read it…write it in the Armenian alphabet. 

LEVINE: Okay we’re going to pause here now we turn over the tape and then we will continue. 

GOOLKASIAN: Okay fine. 

LEVINE: Okay we were talking about the education of an Armenian child versus the education of a Turkish child at when you were a little boy. What do you remember about that? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well it isn’t what I remember because I was too young at that time. Its what I know of…what I’ve read since. Armenians always believed in education and the woman had as much right as the men always in the history of Armenians. Women’s responsibility at home was very high. One of the…one of the of course besides cleaning and so on, one of her jobs was to educate the children. In the beginning when they first obtained their alphabet, the first thing they did was to translate the bible into Armenian. Now they found that over the years, meanings of words changed. So they constructed two languages: one the written language, one the spoken language. The Armenian bible is written in the written language and all the ceremony in the church is in the written language where the meanings don’t change. Armenians did as much—the church especially—did as much of education as possible but they were limited in money and so on. The Christian churches throughout France, England, the United State, and elsewhere send them people. They knew what was happening between the Turks and the Armenians, and they thought that if they could interest the Turks by into becoming Christians by coming into Christian schools, that would be great. They opened schools in Turkey all around, Protestant churches, Catholic churches, to try to get them to enroll. Instead the Turks enrolling, the Armenians enrolled. And the Armenians—out of every hundred that enrolled—probably one or two were Turks and the rest were Armenians and because Armenians were so desirous of learning. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. Can you tell me your personal experience with the massacre in 1915? What you actually remember first hand?

GOOLKASIAN: Yes, yes, well the way to me it started was this one day we were in church and the priest announced that the Turkish government was going to use the area that we lived in for the war purpose. At that time Turkey and Germany were together against England and Italy and so on and there was a war going on and they were going to use it for the war effort, and they were going to tell us to move from where we were and after the war we would be allowed to come back—that they would have a list soon of who’s going when and where. So I don’t know how long after that, there was a bulletin board outside the church showing which families went and left what days. And it so happened that my family, later I found out through another book, the day that my family left which was July 3rd. 

LEVINE: And this was 1915? 

GOOLKASIAN: This was 1915. So two weeks before that week or ten days I don’t know exactly, my father saw his name there and so he had to close up his shop. We had chicken. He killed the chicken. My mother, my grandmother cooked the chicken and took some of the food that they prepared for the winter so that we’d have food fur us and they told us to take food enough for two weeks because that’s how long it would take to get to our destination. So anyway, everything was prepared. We had one horse so my father bought two donkeys and a mare. And this is what we loaded things on to take with us for the trip. So [Malatia] was the destination we were going through. Malatia is a city of Harput, also in the same state. I don’t know exactly how many miles maybe sixty or seventy miles. I don’t know but when you’re walking it it’s a long distance. Well I know when we got there I remember this distinctly. They announced that all the men would have to go and give a record of whose with them. In other words sign in and any children that they had over five years old to take them with—any sons they had over five years old—to take them with them. But I wasn’t quite five then. 

LEVINE: Oh. 

GOOLKASIAN: So my father, my two uncles, and a lot of relatives went to the register while the men and women…while the people collected our donkeys. They said that they’ve got to take and water them and so on so they’d be ready for us when the men come back. Men and women were taken into this huge building—armory like—and told them that the men would follow. Well night came along, no men, and women started to you know ask questions. And they said oh the men will be over shortly and then we heard gunshot, and then the women get desperate and they wanted to find out what the gunshots were and they were saying oh that’s some Turkish celebration they were having. So anyway it was pandemonium there because facilities weren’t there and…everything was a mess. The next morning we were told that we’d have to continue on our journey and the men would follow. This was all women and small children. 

LEVINE: Was this journey any different from the journey from your town to that place? 

GOOLKASIAN: Oh. Oh like day and night. 

LEVINE: What was different? 

GOOLKASIAN: The difference is we wanted to get our animals and instead of getting our animals, we had a horse, a mule, and two donkeys. We got one donkey and it was a sickly thing. 

LEVINE: It wasn’t yours? It was another one.

GOOLKASIAN: It wasn’t ours—somebody else’s—and anyway we had to do with that. We had to walk the rest of the way. And they kept saying we’re not walking fast enough so in the interim my baby brother died…you know things happen you don’t know how. I don’t know how it was. My mother wanted to stop and bury him, and they said nothing no you can’t stop. So she had to carry the baby until at night when we stopped some place. She dug a whole and buried and said prayers and so on with the family. Whenever we would come to a stop at night, Arabs would come and try to sell us food if we had any money. A lot of them didn’t have any money and pretty soon we came to an area where we were by the Euphrates River and at this point we stopped and we were all tired out. And the kids you know like me were in the water. We were in the water. They were a lot of kids there and first thing I know I heard a shot, and I looked and there was a boy about twenty feet from me and he started yelling. And he was first standing up. Now he was on his knees in the water. My mother got me out of there fast. Then we heard this [Unintelligible: 0:40:24] well the Turkish soldiers that were in charge of the caravan of destitute people one of them come over and he says ‘who is the mother of this child?’ The mother of course immediately came over, and he had heard that the mother was very rich and he wanted to find out a way of getting money from her so he shot the little boy in the leg. I don’t know what happened after that. All I know is that this group had been there before us. They were there from another group and we were supposed to cross over. And then word came along that anybody over fifty years old wouldn’t be able to endure the crossing. They would have to endure the trip they were going to take, and they would have to throw them over board. Well the river was very choppy and in fact the day before that, the women were still asking about the men, and then they found bodies floating on it and they knew what had happened. The men had been killed and thrown in the water—in the river—and they were just floating, floating by.  They kind of came with the thing…all the women over fifty or over would have to be thrown over board because they couldn’t endure the trip. And then secretly word came that if you had so much money, a certain amount of money, they would put the elderly in a trunk, and put the trunk on the boat, and that way you know you’d get across see. So I had two grandmothers so my mother had to pay them for two trunks, put my two grandmothers—my mother’s mother and my father’s mother in there to cross. And we did that and when we got across of course we were also tired out and I remember I’m a roamer. I’m interested in everything and everything... I’m all over the place all the time. My mother had trouble keeping me in one place, so I was walking on the beach on the other side and I noticed two soldiers—Turkish soldiers—they had a boy about fourteen, fifteen years old, and one held his hand and the other one went about ten feet from him and shot him. And that scared me so much that I ran back to my mother, and I told my mother and she said ‘keep over…didn’t I tell you keep over here?’ By this time she knew that what money she had, she had to be very careful with it. So she took all the…see they didn’t trust banks those days; when they had any accumulation of money, they changed it into gold coins. So she sewed the gold coins in my clothes. So whenever she needed anything while nobody was looking she would take them out. 

LEVINE: She sewed them in your clothing before you left home? 

GOOLKASIAN: No, no when things got back she did that I don’t know whether it was before we crossed our after. But I know that’s how she kept her money. Otherwise it would be stolen from her. So anyway I went and I was tired and I’m lying on the sand, and she’s lying, everybody around us, and they’re all so down and out…almost giving up you know—half dead, and saw this piece of handkerchief sticking out from in the sand, so I dug around it you know and I couldn’t get at it. So I told my mother about it and so she tried to dug it. She did a little and she tried to pull the thing out you know, the handkerchief, and tried and tried and I couldn’t do it and then finally it came out all of a sudden, and coins flew all over the place. These people were half dead. All of a sudden they became alive. This was food for them if they had the money. So they went for the money you know and then we found it—it was in a little crock. Somebody before us had kept their money in that and hidden it and I don’t know what happened to them, but they must have been taken away or killed or something and that was for us to find. 

LEVINE: Were the Turks telling you something about where you were going now? 

GOOLKASIAN: No, no.

LEVINE: Or now you just knew that this was…uh huh.  

GOOLKASIAN: That was secret yeah. The idea…they knew what the order was—it was to kill us off on the way until there was not nobody left. Well anyway the destination of Der el Zor. D-E-R hyphen E-L hyphen Z-O-R. That’s a…in Syria…Syrian desert, an area in the Syrian desert. Well anyway eventually I guess people did arrive there and probably five percent of the people that started arrived there and they were half dead. Well anyway after that money affair, people had money. They were buying from the Arabs that came with food you know. And then we had to move from there and from one place to another place to another place. One place this Turkish man, well dressed, would come over an saw my sister Anahid. At that time I was five and she was eight years old. He wanted to adopt her very badly and tried to convince my mother that there’s no salvation for us. All of us are going to die. Its not his doing, it’s the government’s doing that please…let me have her. I’ll treat her well as my daughter. But my mother would never, never agree to that. 

LEVINE: Who was this man? 

GOOLKASIAN: I have no idea. I have no idea. Well anyway so after a few days like this going on, I saw some dead bodies and no clothes on them. And I said to my mother, how come they don’t have on any clothes? And she told me, she said there are Arabs in the area and they are nomads. They have nothing except their flock of sheep. When they see somebody dead like that, they figure that the dead don’t need their clothes anymore. So they take their clothes but they don’t bother burying them or anything. So that’s how people didn’t have any clothes. So after seeing this a while, my mother got together with my aunt. Oh before that, my grandmother on my father’s side made up her mind. She’s not going anymore. She’s done. She said let me die here, and we tried to... but finally we had to let her stay and the Turkish soldiers said if you stay, we’re going to shoot you. If you don’t move, we’re going to shoot you. If you don’t move, we’re going to shoot you.  She didn’t care so…

LEVINE: About how old was your grandmother at that time? 

GOOLKASIAN: She must have been about sixty maybe. I don’t know I’m just guessing at it. So she didn’t want to move anymore so after a while and we were gone awhile, we heard the gunshot and we figured they had killed her. 

LEVINE: Do you remember any things that your mother was telling you along the way, during this trip you were taking or any of her perceptions?

GOOLKASIAN: Well the thing you know well children need to be amused and they were trying to tell us stories, and do you know what the stories were? The bible stories. I didn’t know they were bible stories until I came here. I happened to go to a Protestant church you know and they were telling the stories. I knew them. I knew all of the stories [laughs]. 

LEVINE: So your mother and other…

GOOLKASIAN: My mother and grandmother, two grandmothers.

LEVINE: …were telling you these stories. 

GOOLKASIAN: The stories…I tell one grandmother that died and the other one continued. So my mother after all these things happening, she said we’re all…they’re going to do…we’re going to die all of us so in our group was my well my one grandmother died. The other grandmother, my…her oldest son the one who built the swimming pool, wife, son and two daughters. Oh one of her daughters also died. I don’t know just how so that it was only just one daughter left and the son. And also the uncle that came from America, he got married. He was taken with my father—disappeared—and his wife had a baby later on. I’ll tell you about it, and she was with us. She was pregnant. So my mother made up…got together with the others and one night when the soldiers aren’t looking, we’re going to get away from here. The unknown is better than this; we know what this is. We know what the end is going to be. So one night we get away from the group. Well we went on and on. I don’t know how we disguised ourselves. My name was Suleman, which is a Turkish name for Solomon—Suleman—and we started to talk Turkish so they wouldn’t detect we were Armenians on the way. So I remember one place where my mother was trying to cook some food and she started a little fire and went to get some more wood or something I don’t know what. I don’t know where the rest of the families were but my brother, next younger than me, went too close to the fire, and his clothes got caught on fire. By the time my mother got back and put her out, he was burned very bad and he died the next day, and we had to bury him. And later on in the process my next youngest sister, I mean my next older sister, see [Barseni], she, her eyes were very bad. She’d get up in the morning and she couldn’t open her eyes, infections set in and then infection set in on her hair. There were lice all over the place. I remember we used to spend hours killing them between our thumbs…our thumbnails and she died from that and we had to bury her. And then the pregnant aunt was going to have a baby. So they shoed the children away and I remember they gave her a bottle and told her to blow into the bottle, blow, I guess that caused some pressure and the baby was born. But there was no food. Everything was such a mess that in a few days the baby died. And then I don’t know what happened after that. I don’t know what happened to the mother either. She may have died. I don’t know. We went on trying to find some place that’s safe. We heard that some area beyond, they were building railroad tracks for future railroads to go through. So my mother and my aunt thought that, well there may be some work over there or something you know. So we went…we finally got there and sure enough they got a job and they put me in charge of a donkey—go around—so the donkey was loaded with water you know so the workers could…if they wanted any water, they could open the spigot and they got water. That’s what I was doing for a while.  

LEVINE: When you were on the last leg of the journey before you reached the railroad tracks…

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah. 

LEVINE: …how were you sustaining yourself with food? Did you have any food?  

GOOLKASIAN: I have no idea. It may have been the coins that my mother had saved in my clothes.

LEVINE: Were you meeting up with Arab people along the way that you could…? 

GOOLKASIAN: There weren’t Arab people and Turkish people and there were…there were areas I guess where you could buy something. So since our names were changed—my name—I don’t know what the others were. But see being living in Turkey, we knew several languages. I knew Turkish almost as well as I knew Armenian even at the age see. Well anyway…

LEVINE: The donkey with the water that you were bringing…

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah that’s what I was doing and one day this well-rested gentleman comes over with my mother and my grandmother—the only grandmother left was my mother’s mother—and he asked me if this is your grandmother and of course with me, my true grandmother was the one that lived with us. I said, ‘no that’s not my grandmother.’ At that age I didn’t know the difference you know. So anyway I don’t know what happened he got mad. I don’t know what happened. Later on I guess it was straightened out and then what happened was my mother had agreed to live with him if my grandmother could live also and of course my sister and I. So that firstly I know I was in a family. I had a home. So many things happened at this point. There was a baby girl born and I don’t know what her name was or anything, all I know is a baby girl born.

LEVINE: You mean to your mother? 

GOOLKASIAN: Yes to my mother and I know he used to go to work. I think he was an engineer or some sort for the railroad. I don’t know but he was a Turk. After my mother seen so many of her people…she did desperately something to try to save my sister and I so she figured that’s the only way she could save us. So anyway in the interim, she was cooking food for us under a tent I remember. And the tent was built around an area that had been dug about three feet so that you could stand in it easily, you know. And she was cooking food and word came along that a big storm was coming and rain, and be prepared to leave the place you know. And then the…shortly after that word came that a dam had burst and water was coming from where we were. We had better get out of there. It was pouring and I remember we went up this hill to where there were homes, Arab homes, and on the way I lost my shoe, my shoe…we didn’t pay attention and my sister, my mother and I got there and knocked on the door and they let us in, and they gave us a change of clothes and clean up so that we were safe there. The next morning was the brightest, sunniest day I remember in all my life. It was so beautiful and they started talking that they had been a lot of damage done and a lot of people had been killed and they said they had to go look for bodies to bury them. So of course me I had to be with them so somehow I got with them and the first place we came to, some dogs had gotten to the body before we had so they shot the dogs, and they identified who the bodies were and they buried them. There were mounds and mounds of sand like you see in Cape Cod—high mounds—the rushing water had brought all these mounds of sand down and we went to several places, and another place the dogs had gotten…carrying…what do you call it? 

LEVINE: Birds. 

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah birds had gotten to them and they had to kill the birds and they identified who they were and buried them and so on. And that was the end of that…that was…another time I remember were there was a huge cloud coming our way and I didn’t know what it was. It was a…locusts…a cloud of locusts. Everything that was green within a few hours they left, there wasn’t a thing left that was green. 

LEVINE: When did that happen? The locusts? 

GOOLKASIAN:  In that period…

LEVINE: That period when the rains came…

GOOKASIAN: I couldn’t say exactly which came first.  I couldn’t say which came first. I know that happened. 

LEVINE: Yeah okay let’s pause here while we change the tapes...

GOOLKASIAN: Oh boy!

LEVINE: …and then we’ll continue. 

LEVINE: We’re beginning now a tape two. I’m speaking with Peter Goolkasian and we were talking about the locusts. 

GOOLKASIAN: Yes. 

LEVINE: That came about the time of the rain. 

GOOLKASIAN: Yes when the locusts came it was like a cloud—huge cloud—and we didn’t in a few hours they were gone and there wasn’t a thing left that was green in the whole area and people were concerned that lived there that they’d have to find water and water and reach… bring these plants to life again. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm. Now were you still five years old? Is this all…has this what we’ve been talking about happened all in that same year? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well at this time I was probably six or seven. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 
 
GOOLKASIAN: I was probably six or seven years old. I was growing. 

LEVINE: So you lived in this sort of temporary town…

GOOLKASIAN: Yes, yes. 

LEVINE: …for a few years?

GOOLKASIAN:  Yes, that’s right. Now what he was doing—this Turkish man—was leaving in the morning and we wouldn’t see him until at night. And in the meantime, my mother associated with other people there. Something odd happened.  This Turkish woman came over one day; she knew my mother was Armenian. She says you know she says, you know I’m almost blind, my eyes are bothering me terribly, and I don’t know what to do. Please they tell me that you know pretty good, pretty well on medications. What can I do to clear my eyes? So my mother thinking to herself that you know what the Turks have to done to me, here’s a chance I can return it. In her mind, you know, so she says you know when you go home take some lukewarm water, put two heaping teaspoons of salt in it, stir it well, bathe your eye in that. Oh she thanked my mother and left and a week later she comes over. She says I want to thank you—I to kiss your hand, she says. She says, it cured me [laughs]. 

LEVINE: She said what? 

GOOLKASIAN: She said ‘it cured me.’ She says…she says the thing I can’t believe it. I did it and it hurt a while but I kept doing it and  now my eyes are okay [laughs]. My mother was amazed but it goes to show you you know that when somebody is good is trying to do something bad, can’t do it. 

LEVINE: Now did people think you were Turkish in general or?

GOOLKASIAN: No they just knew my mother was living with this Turkish man and so on. At this time he associated with other Turkish people you know. So I remember one day, you know I was in another Turkish house and the woman was trying to put the cosmetics and she put a walnut meat you know, and you think she’d be eating it… no she lit a match to it and it burned like a candle and what it left was nothing but carbon…chalk…like chalk and she used that in her eyes you know and made a beautiful… I couldn’t get over it. You can use harmless things to beautify yourself, why use these complex, unknown chemicals that they use in cosmetics?

LEVINE: Yeah. Well how did the Turkish man treat you and sister? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well I don’t remember him much. All I know is he went to work and came back and as far as I know we were treated well. 

LEVINE: Uh huh.

GOOLKASIAN: And my aunt, my mother’s brother’s wife, they had a son and two daughters—had lost one daughter—they lived not too far. And I don’t know whether she went through the same thing or not. I don’t know but I know that my grandmother used to go back and forth between the two houses see, and there’s incidents where I had experience with my grandmother there.

LEVINE: Yeah, well why don’t you mention that. 

GOOLKASIAN: Well this incident was with my cousin [Yervan] that was the name of my cousin…my uncle’s son. He’s in Italy now and he’s a dentist. And he was about nine months younger than I and we were together all the time you know and to get hot water e had to go to where there was a train and get some hot water from the train. We’d take buckets and they’d fill it, and bring it. So this day my grandmother gave me a bucket and my cousin a bucket to go get some water, hot water. So we went over and we got to close to the water you know and she got mad. She was going to punish us. I knew I hadn’t done anything wrong in my mind. Why is she going to punish me? I’m not going to be punished. Well my cousin gets caught and gets punished but I said heck I’m not going to get punished. Previously there was a contingent of British soldiers not too far from there and there were Hindu soldiers, officers who were British but the soldiers were Hindu. Sikh they call them?

LEVINE: Sikh.

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm.

GOOLKASIAN: They had these turbans on their head you know and they were very nice people. They took to me you know and they liked me very much and they used to give me clothes that my mother used to cut up and to make for me you know. So my grandmother was going to punish me so I said no, nobody’s going to punish me, I didn’t do anything wrong. So I took off and went over there and they told me that on the way you know there’s lions and the tigers and everything else to try to scare me you know. Well I was ready to put up with that than be spanked. So I went over there and of course the Hindu soldiers liked me very much so they got word that I was okay. The next day they bring me back. So they kept me there one day and brought me back. 

LEVINE: Oh what an adventure!

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah oh yeah. Oh I had a lot of adventures like that, yeah, and there was another time where there was an Arab wedding and in their wedding it is quite interesting. They sing songs and walk the streets you know to wherever the [Unintelligible: 0:68:33] that they’re going to have the affair in and in the meantime they sing a song and they go [makes sound unintelligibly at 0:68:38] like that, and it was interesting so I was following them you know and when they went in the hall, I went into the hall too. So they saw me, and they asked me if I was hungry and I said yeah [laughs]. I was always hungry. So anyway, so they fed me well and let me off after. It was interesting but I was into everything. 

LEVINE: Anything else you can remember? 

GOOLKASIAN: Oh I remember one day this Arab comes from the desert and he had a snake, a five-foot snake, and he brought the snake over. He had killed it of course. He says the snake bit him and he was lying down and I guess he had put his clothes down and the snake had coiled under his clothes or something and when he went to get at his clothes, the snake bit him so he killed the snake and he had heard that if you eat the snake that it will neutralize the poison. So he cooked the snake [laughs]. I helped him eat it [laughs]. I was always hungry—always. And well anyway that was the snake incident and another time I was in a tent and minding my own business you know. I don’t know what I was doing and I saw this black centipede, cold black; its got feet on both sides, about this long six or eight feet… inches you know and started to come on…on me you know and I had heard that they were very, very poisonous, that if you ever come across them don’t move and they’ll go away. So see I was scared to death so he got up on my shoulder, up, up around my neck and then come down on the other side and the minute that he was off of me, I ran [laughs]. But it was quite an experience though because they were very deadly that if they bit you wouldn’t last very long. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm. Whoa. 

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah. I had experiences like that. I had a lot of other experiences. Before we came there, there was one place where the Arabs in that little village we came to, had one well and they had lost the bucket. The bucket had gone down and they didn’t know how to get to the wall. They didn’t have any children there and I was just the right size. So they grabbed me and they asked my mother if they could lower me to get the pail for them. I didn’t want to…Iwas crying and against my will they put me down the well. Finally I got a hold of that bucket and brought up and oh they treated me like a million...it was a great experience. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GOOLKASIAN: And they treated my mother and everybody else that was with us. 

LEVINE: This was when you were on route? 

GOOLKASIAN: This was after we got away from the caravan of destitute people. We were on our way you know to…we didn’t know where, and this was before we came to the railroad area.

LEVINE: Right. 

GOOLKASIAN: But there’s a lot of experiences I went through like that…that sometimes it comes to my memory and then disappears and then later on it pops up again. It’s quite interesting what went on there. 

LEVINE: Uh huh.

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah.

LEVINE: So did you stay there very long after the rain and the locusts came? After you were…

GOOLKASIAN: We were in that area until armistice was signed. My mother had a baby girl. Later she had…the baby girl died. I don’t know what happened and then she had a baby boy. The Turk was very good to us and we were protected. When armistice was signed, we got word that the …all Armenians wherever they were would have free passage to Aleppo, Syria, so my mother heard about this. She gathered us and my grandmother, her mother, and my aunt and by this time she had lost the second daughter she had, and only her son was living. And we all got together in some way and they got on the train but there was no room for me on the train. I don’t know how, why so she put me in charge of an Arab that had a donkey with two pockets. So they put one kid in one pocket and one kid—me—in the other pocket. We were balanced and we went to Aleppo on that donkey, and in the meantime my mother was waiting for us at the train when we got there, which was probably a day and a half later. 

LEVINE: What happened to the Turkish man? Did he go with you or did he stay? 

GOOLKASIAN: No, while he went to work, we slipped out. And oh the baby boy that my mother had went to the neighbor…Turkish neighbor and told her…gave her a message to thank the man for taking care of us but we had to leave and that the boy…the baby boy belonged to him. Yeah. So that’s how we left. So then we gathered in Aleppo, Syria. Before we got to Aleppo they had orphanages there. So we were put in an orphanage. 

LEVINE: Your mother too? The whole family?

GOOLKASIAN: No my mother worked at the orphanage.

LEVINE: I see.

GOOLKASIAN: In other words whoever was able to work, worked. But my sister and I were in the orphanage and I was with the boys and she was with the girls. And to make us feel good the head of the orphanage was known as “father” and all the teachers were known as “mother.” Psychologically that worked very well and I was in the orphanage and I got sick. My head lice and everything it was terrible and it had done a job on me. They sent me to a barber there and also a young fellow that had gone through the massacres and he gave me a haircut and tried to clear up…and later on he married my sister [laughs]. Its odd what happens. 

LEVINE: And what was his name?

GOOLKASIAN: His name is [Carnig del Mazosian]. 

LEVINE: Is this in your…?

GOOLKASIAN: He’s living now. He’s ninety-five, ninety-six years old. He’s living now

LEVINE: Oh he’s…uh huh. Uh huh.

GOOLKASIAN: and he’s the one that you that you probably…that was his son. 

LEVINE: Yes okay 

GOOLKASIAN: That was his son, yeah.

LEVINE: Okay well about the orphanage. Do you remember any experiences there?

GOOLKASIAN: Yes we used to go fly kites. 

LEVINE: …besides…

GOOLKASIAN: I learned how to make kites. I learned how to make different things you know and we were there when I had this problem with my scalp, you know. My mother’s brother had married a Catholic Armenian girl so she was in a French orphanage with her son. We were separated and they had better medical care than the Near East had. So she had recommended that we go and join there. So I was taken out and put there and they cleared my scalp from whatever it was that was… 

LEVINE: Were you separated then from your mother and your sister?

GOOLKASIAN: No, no. No, my mother still worked and we saw one another. My sister came on that orphanage too so were together…

LEVINE: Uh huh.

GOOLKASIAN: …in every way. And we went to church. There was an Armenian church, and my mother saw some woman writing to America—some relative in America. Well of course she never knew how big America was. She thought it was you know a small town or something so she said do you mind if I put a note in your letter? She says I have brother-in-laws and a sister-in-law in America and they’re probably wondering what happened to us and I’d like to get in touch with them. So that’s how the letter came to Boston. That’s where they were [laughs]. It was amazing. 

LEVINE: And that’s where her relatives were and that’s where the letter was going?

GOOLKASIAN:  Yeah, my father’s relatives. Well one was in Lawrence and the other was in Charlestown. But anyway that’s how we got word and then a letter came along with some money and she took us out of the orphanage and we took pictures and sent back and they asked if we would want to come to America, and of course we want to come to America. This is no place to be so they sent further money and we took more pictures and sent back and from there we went to France. In France we don’t know the language so we had to depend on other people. Well there were Armenian people that were looking…men looking for us who didn’t know the language so you had to get this eye thing…eye…

LEVINE: An exam?

GOOLKASIAN: [Bono and no bono]. In other words certain bacteria… bacterial infection in the eye…they wouldn’t let you in the United States. They didn’t want the people in United States to get that. So supposedly my eye—everybody’s eye was okay—but my eye where I couldn’t talk back…was bad. So they had to treat us. So they kept us three months over there treating. Finally my mother said ‘my money’s gone. I have no more. I can’t pay anymore.’ So then they okayed it.

LEVINE: Do you think that your eye was really bad or do you think that was a ploy to…

GOOLKASIAN: Well maybe it was bad in the beginning but it was well much before they okayed it. In other words they wanted to get as much as they could before they let you go.

LEVINE: Now where you were you in France? You were in France at that time? 

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah we were in France.


LEVINE: Where in France?

GOOLKASIAN: Marseilles. 

LEVINE: In Marseilles and that’s where you left from or where did you leave from when you took the ship?

GOOLKASIAN: No, no. We arrived in Marseilles, and immediately the Armenians took over. We couldn’t speak the language so on so we had to follow everything they said in order to go to America from there. So that’s how finally we got the okay and we went to  [Blahaver] we took a boat from [Blahaver] and came to America. 

LEVINE: Do you remember the name of the boat?

GOOLKASIAN: [Unintelligible: 0:81:23]

LEVINE:  Mm-hmm and do you remember anything about that voyage on the [Unintelligible: 0:81:30]? 

GOOLKASIAN: Oh yeah I remember a lot of things [laughs].

LEVINE: Oh good, okay. 

GOOLKASIAN: We were in the third class.

LEVINE: Yeah.

GOOLKASIAN: Which meant that we didn’t have any room. We were in the [cars] down below and no privacy to speak of and they didn’t have much water on that boat, they had just wine. They drank wine in place of water. Well anyway I had to bring the water around and I made friends with the people that worked there you know and it was very nice. My mother learned how to tell fortune in France in the three months that she was there you know. But it required playing cards. Well while we were in France, I don’t know how, but with what little money she had. She bought…I bought a small deck of playing cards—they were miniature you know—so with that she entertained the others you know…telling their fortune on it and she got quite famous on that. 

LEVINE: On the ship? She was doing it?

GOOLKASIAN: On the ship yeah. It was very interesting and then when she came here she did that. It was quite interesting and on the ship we were coming to port and my mother says, ‘oh you got to be clean. You got be clean when you see your uncles. First impression means an awful lot.’ So she found out where there was a bathtub you know downstairs. So we went in…took my clothes…she first checked to see if there was hot water; yeah there was hot water; took clothes off and poured the water on me and she was soaping me and no soapsuds…couldn’t understand why. I taste the water—salt-water—just ocean water there [laughs]. Well anyway that’s another experience. A lot of things like that happened. 

LEVINE: Yeah.

GOOLKASIAN: And then we came over. We arrived to…in New York and they told us that everybody needed to go up deck because we are going to by the Statue of Liberty. So we saw the Statue of Liberty and they explained to us. They had an interpreter to do it for Armenians in the Armenian language—that that was given by the country of France, by France. That was to welcome you to America and there were American flags around. It made a terrific impression on me and we went and they examined us and everything was fine. It took a little time for that. 

LEVINE: Do you remember any impressions of Ellis Island? 

GOOLKASIAN: Yes and no. The only thing I know is the flags made a big difference in me. At that time I don’t know maybe I’m wrong, maybe I saw only one flag but to me it looked like a lot of flags. It made a very big impression on me and when we were let out we didn’t…we were told that my grandfather—my mother’s father—that had come there years ago was to meet us and we heard someone calling Goolkasian and we answered to that. And my mother and they hugged one another…it was great. He took us to his house. He was deaf. He was completely deaf and nothing could be done about it. He was a jeweler but because he was deaf he couldn’t…all he could do was repair and things like that. But they didn’t get the money, the ones that got the money were the ones that… 

LEVINE: Were talking.

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah, that sold things you know. Well anyways he took us to his apartment. I don’t know if it was the third or fifth floor or somewhere 

LEVINE: Where was it do you know?

GOOLKASIAN: In New York City. I don’t know. I don’t know what part of New York City and she and he, and my mother conversed in every which way you can I don’t know how. So the next day he took us to the train station and the first place where I tasted the doughnuts, which tasted so good [laughs], yeah. 

LEVINE: Were there any other things that you encountered for the first time that made an impression with you when you first got here? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well the buildings of course, the tall buildings. And then people were rushing so fast. I was wondering where they were going. I was wondering if they knew where they were going at the speed they were going you know [laughs]. But I didn’t realize when you have to work and you’ve got so much time to get to work and back you know, you have to rush. But I never had to do that so going through what I learned, it was an awful lot. So anyways we got on the train and then we got off in Worcester, Massachusetts. My mother had a brother there—in fact two brothers—and they came and met us at the train station, and we stayed with them. There’s an interesting thing that happened there. The next day they were taking us to buy us new clothes so my brother…my mothers’ brother’s son who at that time must have been about twenty, twenty-five years old you know. He had me by the hand you know. He let me go by the hand. We came to this square you know. We walked from his house, from his uncle’s house to the area where we were going to do the buying and I knew just what streets there were. You know I was very observant and I saw this statue…this sort of in front of a department store. I saw this statue on a long pole, and I looked at you know and it was amazing how they put the statue up there you know I’m thinking. And first thing I looked around and I’m alone, a lot of other people but none of my relatives. So there was a turnstile you know. I went through that to the other side nobody and this side nobody. Nothing bothered me you know because I got through so many things I knew I could take care…I knew where the house was so instead of going to the second street on the left after I left there, I went to the first street on the left and about where the house would be. It didn’t look right but I said well it must be okay. So I went up the…I don’t know the front stairs. I went from the back and I went upstairs, and I didn’t even knock on the door I just opened the door and walked in. There was this woman washing the floor in the kitchen. She let out a yell and I let out a yell and I ran out of there [laughs]. And then I went back to the same place again and wondered where the heck they were you know. And I walked around again and I started to cry and the first thing I know is this uniformed man started to talk to me, you know, of course in English. But I didn’t know English you know and soon he took my hand and he bought me an ice cream and boy that ice cream cone was delicious. So then anyway he took me over to this building and there was this woman and there were many chairs there you know. And I was so tired, I pulled two or three chairs together you know, and I lied down and fell asleep. And I didn’t know who the woman was but she was supposed to take care of me or something. I thought well maybe this is…this policeman’s wife and I wonder if he’s… I’m thinking I wonder if he’s got any children. I wonder if…I thought I was gone…I lost my mother and them, you know how a child at that age you know. Although I was nine years old I had never gone to school. All the experiences I had were bad experiences so then they woke me up and the first thing I know I saw my uncle’s son come over. And he picked me up and he was so tickled pink. I remember he gave Juicy Fruit gum to all the officers there, you know. Because I remember Juicy Fruit gum I had seen in Syria. See I remember. So he took me home and then the next day, they took me out and bought me clothes. Oh I had the greatest experience there. My aunt…

LEVINE: Let’s pause here. We’ll turn the tape over.

GOOLKASIAN: Oh, okay.

LEVINE: We want to make sure to get the whole experience on tape. 

GOOLKASIAN: Boy oh boy.

LEVINE: Okay we’re begin…we’re going to continue now, you were talking about an experience you had let’s see after you had the Juicy Fruit gum. 

GOOLKASIAN: Oh yeah. My uncle took me and gave the officers Juicy Fruit gum. I don’t know if he gave them anything else or not but anyway he took me…the next day we went out and they bought me American clothes, a little different. You could point me out you know by the clothes I had. But we thought we had the right clothes but it wasn’t. It was different. Well anyway the next day they took me to clothes…oh my aunt had a two daughters and they had a beautiful Christmas tree with the candles on it, with real small candles, with holders on it—on the tree and so on—and although this was February they knew that we were coming so they had saved it for us. So when we came over after getting together. They lit the candles for my sister and I to see, and we just loved it. It was so beautiful. It’s a great memory, and all the neighbor women, men, women, you know Armenians came over to see us and they were asking about some of their relatives, if we knew them and so on. Well anyway my mother had a lot of information on that. Well the next day we were to…after my clothes, they bought me clothes, the following day we took a train for Charlestown, Massachusetts—Boston actually—south station. No wait a minute…yeah South Station. So we got there and my aunts, my aunt’s husband Oscar [Goolshorian], and my father’s youngest brother, George Goolkasian were there. They picked us up and took us to their house, which was on Main Street and they made room for us. They didn’t have much…they had a house over a five and ten-cent store on Main Street and it was small. So shortly after that they moved over the meat market that they had there—a meat market and grocery store. 

LEVINE: In Charlestown?

GOOLKASIAN: My uncle, my father’s youngest brother and my aunt’s husband were partners in this business, [Norman] Provision and Supply Company on Main Street in Charlestown near between City Square and Thompson Square and they rented two apartments upstairs over the store and the first apartment, my uncle George and my mother and us took. And the second apartment, my aunt and her two sons [Sisag] and [Haig Goolshorian] had that apartment. Later she had a daughter…and we lived there for a year. I was taken to a school in Charlestown along with my cousin Sisag who was three years younger than I. They put him in the Kindergarten and they put me in the third grade. I couldn’t speak a word of English. I didn’t know anything in English and I had a very hard time learning English because there’s no rules…good, better, best, and instead of being good, gooder, goodest and something like that you know and of course English is different. The verb is put at the end while in Armenian and most other languages, the verb is put in the beginning. So it was very confusing. 

LEVINE: Do you remember when it was that English began to click, click for you? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well it didn’t click until about a couple of years, three years letter because everything I was learning was an exception. I didn’t know any rules to go by. In fact, later on when I…in high school when I took French, I had picked up French in three months I was there, and I picked up pretty good as a kid you know. I lost everything because the pronunciation was different. The way they expressed it was different. It was a tough experience for me because I had to learn. 

LEVINE: Uh huh. 

GOOLKASIAN: See. But it turned out okay. After we were three years no…a year and a half, my uncle Baxter. His name was [Banglasaj] in Armenian, but in English the equivalent is Baxter. When he had heard that we had been driven out of our homes, he joined the services here. He was in France twenty-six months in the service as a... he had gone to Massachusetts College of Pharmacy. He was a pharmacist. He was in the pharmacy corps., and he was being let out now that the war was over. And he…he was trying to get a job in the drugstore. Well you wont believe this but its true. America was very clannish; they didn’t respect the foreigners. A man with a name like Goolkasian, a pharmacist? That was out. So he finally got a job with [Ropes] Drugstore in Salem, Mass. It seems that one of the fellows that he graduated with had a drugstore there. In fact he had four or five drugstores and he had a laboratory where he made some of his own items, and so he put my father—my uncle that is—in charge of the laboratory. So he got a good job there. So I went to the laboratory one time and I saw how it was. It was very nice, and my sister went a couple of times. In fact when people that were under him were working in the laboratory and were on vacation, my sister went and helped a little and so on and got paid for it. Well anyway whenever some of the druggists in the store didn’t want to work at night, he would take their place. And finally he got into the drug business that way and he saw that this was no good so he had saved enough money. He and my mother got married a year and a half after we were there and we lived in Salem, Mass. And he figured out the best thing to do after he had worked in Ropes Drugstore about two years is to have its own store. There was a drugstore an Armenian had in Somerville, Mass that was for sale so he bought the store and he almost lived it in because he couldn’t afford any help and the only help he had was my sister and I. And for years we went to school and finally Depression set in and things were pretty tough. In those days girls weren’t necessary to be educated and it was against his grain but he had to take my sister out of high school to help him in the store. Of course every day that I went to school, afternoons, I helped in the store on the soda fountain. And every other night I’d work so that I really didn’t have any childhood after that. It isn’t that he did this on purpose. It just was the only way. And we made it…we made out okay. Of course my aunt objected to him marrying my mother because my mother was previously married and had two children. She wanted him to have his own family, his own you know…

LEVINE: This was the next youngest brother to your father? 

GOOLKASIAN: Right, yeah. My father had two older brothers and then after him the baby boy was born—was named [Baglasar] died. A year and a half later another one was born, named the same name, died. The third one was born, a year and a half after that and he lived, and this was the one who married my mother. 

LEVINE: And what was his name?

GOOLKASIAN: [Baglasar].

LEVINE: Oh the same name, uh huh. 

GOOLKASIAN: My grandmother was insisting that’s what it was going to be see. So anyway that’s the way that worked out. 

LEVINE: Well can you sort of summarize after you…well how long did you stay in school and then what did you do in your adult life? 

GOOLKASIAN: Okay. Okay I had difficulty with English because of the irregularities in the English language although at the time when I started school, I could fluently speak Armenian, Turkish, Arabic. I got understand and make conversation in Kurdish. I learned a little French so that I could get along with what I picked up in France but English was so different. It was very, very difficult, and then after that finally I got two double promotions. First they put me in the third grade and I was left in the third grade for three years. Finally I got two double promotions so I was right up with the same age group and I graduated. And when I started…the following year I started Massachusetts College of Pharmacy. At that time I was very interested in electronics. Electronics were just coming in but it was one of those things you didn’t know what it was going to be and it was depression years nothing…so and my father needed help. He needed help very bad. He was putting in too many hours so I became a pharmacist. In three years I gradated and I worked with him for two years until I got married. 

LEVINE: And how did you meet your wife? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well when I was once at Massachusetts College of Pharmacy, it was the first class…first time in history there were so many Armenians in the class. Out of eighty, nine were Armenians, that’s better than ten percent. Generally there’s only one or two Armenians in a class. So this was extraordinary and one of the fellows that graduated with me, he got married and I was best man and my mother was maid of honor. So he had his wife had relatives, and they were…one of the girls was a…what do you call it? One of the girls in the…

LEVINE: In the pharmacy class? No. 

GOOLKASIAN: No, no, no at the wedding. I can’t…

LEVINE: Bridesmaid?

GOOLKASIAN: A bridesmaid. One of the girls was a bridesmaid you know and I guess she was quite interested in me but I was so bashful I couldn’t even talk to a girl. That’s how bashful I was even after graduating from high school—college. So in fact when we had the prom in college I took my cousin from Lawrence with me you know. Well anyway she wanted to dance with me and I don’t know whether I did dance or not. Well anyway I ended up…I married her. 

LEVINE: And what was her name?

GOOLKASIAN: [Isabel] Yeeshilian. 

LEVINE: How do you spell her maiden name?

GOOLKASIAN: Isabel Y-E-E-S-H-I-L-I-A-N. Isabel Yeeshilian and we had two daughters, and after working for my father for two more years I wanted to expand and I really thought there was something in pharmacy that if we all worked together in the single group size pharmacy in the square, we could all do well and we wouldn’t have to work so hard, see. And at that time we were in Somerville, so David Square was the thing I was interested in. But I couldn’t get my father interested in it. He says I’ve worked hard. I can’t. So I said well now gee. I said…my brother was coming up now. My brother—his son—was growing up and he was interested in pharmacy so anyway I told them…you know this store we have isn’t enough for two families. I’ve got to think about my son. She said that’s okay there’s no hard feelings, nothing. So I left and I opened a drug store in Waltham and then from Waltham I went into business with a cousin of mine, George—uncle George’s son became a pharmacist also—so he had gone to war and come back. And he was working in a place in Boston so together we opened a drugstore. My brother was supposed to come in with us but he didn’t somehow, something. Well anyway we were there six years and the landlord was terrible. There was no area to park and you couldn’t expand the business very easily. So I was still interested in electronics. So we broke up and I went into electronics. 

LEVINE: How did you do that? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well while I was working in the drugstore I got interested in with a doctor who was an anesthesiologist in Bedford and at that time I was on the side fooling around with electronics. I was deeply interested in it so I had developed a pulse monitor. You put a little button in here and the gauge goes back and force, and you can see how the pulse is doing and so on, you know. So the doctor encouraged me and he said that’s a good thing. He said, ‘they need something like that.’ At that time they didn’t have too many equipment in the hospitals. So anyway finally I got a patent on that, and through that I got into electronics. And I worked for [Honeywell] in research, and did some research on the modules that they set up in the guidance system using transistors and so on. And I had some interesting experiences there and then finally after five years, the headquarters were in Minneapolis, Honeywell and they broke up the division…research division in Boston. So we were all given good references and I began to work for another outfit, [Bolt, Baronic, and Newman] in Cambridge and these people didn’t have any electronics but they were organizing a chemistry division. Well chemistry is on my line so I got the job there and after we were there three years, the headquarters thought we weren’t making enough money for them so they wanted to do away with it. So we got the permission to take the company out—prototype company—out of the Bolt, Baronic and Newman, and become independent. So only a half dozen of us went out, less than that, and each one put out a little money and I put a little money in it too and get out in there. So I worked on that for fifteen years and then retired from that. 

LEVINE: Wow. Well when you think about your whole life experience and all that you went through…

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah. 

LEVINE: ...as a young child, what effect or what impact do you think it had on you later in your life as a person?

GOOLKASIAN: Well I was always shy and I knew that I was shy and I knew that that was the worse thing in the world for me to be. So since I came to America and I found out that five or six years later that I was so shy, I did my darndest to get away from that. I knew it was wrong. I have to do something about it and I did get away from the shyness, that’s why I talked too much. 

LEVINE: [laughs] Well why did you think it was so wrong to be shy? 

GOOLKASIAN: Well because when you’re shy you know something and you don’t get anywhere with it. If you don’t know anything…and I knew that early…so I figured that shyness is no good for anybody; it’s the worse thing in the world and I have to get rid of it at any expense and that why I say sometimes I talk too much. I say too much and my wife…

LEVINE: Not in this instance at all. 

GOOLKASIAN: …and my wife tries to stop me. But I have a wonderful wife and she understands me and we understand. We are very close. 

LEVINE: Wonderful. What would you say you feel most satisfied about? I mean when you think about your whole life? What is it that makes you feel proud or satisfied? 

GOOLKASIAN: Coming to America was the greatest thing that could happen to me. I know I had talent because I was interested. The trouble is some people are interested in this a or b or c. Everything a to z. Everything impresses me and that was the downfall for me. That’s why I’m not a millionaire. I’m not a rich man. If I had stuck to one thing and not that I didn’t do good on the things that I did go into. But I would have been better off if I stuck to one thing and went to deliver on that. But you learn that too late in life sometimes. 

LEVINE: Well your old age…this age that you’re at now after your retirement. 

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah.

LEVINE: Well what do you feel about that? 

GOOLKASIAN: I feel that I could have accomplished a lot more than I did but I’m satisfied. I’m not a pauper. I’m not a rich man but in memories and satisfaction that I’ve lived to this age when so many of my contemporaries didn’t, and I outlived my father…it’s a great feeling to me. 

LEVINE: What…what do you attribute your ripe old age and your vitality to this?

GOOLKASIAN: Well going into pharmacy helped a lot because I got to know better how to take care of myself. Outside of that as far as the vitality from the time I was very small, I was always eager. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm.

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah, eager. But during the war all the things happened to me, put me way down to such a degree that I couldn’t talk to anybody. 

LEVINE: When you first got here you mean? 

GOOLKASIAN: Yeah. For instance when I first got here, on the side I used to sing songs you know that I had learned—Arabic songs and so on—they tried to get me to sing in front of a group but I couldn’t do it. In front of a group, I was down. In fact even after I graduated from college, I had opportunities with groups you know, and I was one time president of [Harper’s] junior league. But I had that thing in my mind that I couldn’t do the job good and I couldn’t do it. 

LEVINE: Do you think that had anything to do with all that you had been through? 

GOOLKASIAN: Oh absolutely. Now to give you an idea, my own two children, two daughters, they are so good and have advanced so fast because they have no hindrances. My youngest daughter, Priscilla, she’s a violist…when she works in my drugstore, she come in and I just had to tell her how to do a thing once and she knew it right off; she could do it. My older daughter, Diane, the same. Priscilla today helps her husband you know; she’s fantastic. She’s so versatile and everything. Diane is the same way; she makes up her mind, she’s going to do a certain thing and nothing can stop her. In fact she married a Jewish fellow from Iran and he’s a very learned man. He’s a…with a high degree, worked for the government and they have two sons. And she has raised those two sons fantastic. Priscilla’s got two sons and they’re doing great. I’m so proud of it that although I have no money, I am the richest man in the world.

LEVINE: Mm-hmm. We don’t have too much more time but let me ask you a question about your memories. 

GOOLKASIAN: Yes. 

LEVINE: Your memories that you have from going through the genocide and all that…how do you think they have changed over the years? In the way that you remember it? Can…is there anything…

GOOLKASIAN: They haven’t changed any…the only thing I say to myself is the Turks had a group of…had a nation like Armenians, they were so eager. They weren’t interested in politics; they were interested in doing good job on whatever they did. They tried to do away with them and they are the losers. 

LEVINE: Uh huh.

GOOLKASIAN: They are the losers because these people that they killed, they’re children are doing fantastic everywhere they go and today in the United States there’s close to a million Armenians. In the last ten years, twenty years probably is when it has doubled and the ones that came before—the children and grandchildren of these people that went through the war—they have done so well today. It’s amazing. 

LEVINE: And one last question, how do you consider yourself as far as being Armenian and being American? Can you sort of talk about how you think on that?

GOOLKASIAN: Well I’m an Armenian American. There is no such thing as just American. This country is made up of conglomerate. Its either you’re French American, Armenian American, Greek American, Italian American and so on. So I’m American period. But I have my roots are still in Armenia because it’s in such a state that it needs my approval. 

LEVINE: Mm-hmm. Okay is there anything else that you would like to say before we close? 

GOOLKASIAN: All I can say is this that I wish Americans would appreciate America more than they do. Those that have been here for years and years and years—those are the ones that are getting in trouble. And also when I came here I didn’t know the English language. The English language should be the main language of this country. You can’t have two, three languages as you know…one here, one there and so on. You can’t. You go to Florida, southern Florida, they speak nothing but Spanish. All the signs of the street are in Spanish, you’d think you’re in Spain. America was founded under the English language. It should be kept in the English language. You cant do good…you know I think the reason why some of the other nationalities aren’t doing so well is they’re sticking to their own language too strongly. You’ve got to learn that you’re here now; this is your country. 

LEVINE: Well we are going to stop here. I want to thank you very much for a most interesting interview. It’s a privilege for me to have been speaking to Peter Goolkasian who came from Turkish Armenia in nineteen…

GOOLKASIAN: Twenty.

LEVINE: Twenty…when you were just about ten years of age.

GOOLKASIAN: Right.

LEVINE: And this is Janet Levine for the National Parks Service signing off. 


