LEVINE:This is Janet Levine for the National Park Service. It’s October 4th, 1993, and I’m here with Dr. Abraham Gootnick, who came from Russia in 1923 when he was thirteen years old. I want to welcome you and I want to say that I’m very much looking forward to your, not only reminiscences but any interpretive statements you might care to mention during this interview. GOOTNICK:Thank you. LEVINE:Okay, we’ll let’s start at the beginning with your birth date. GOOTNICK:Well, I was a little bit young to take notes at that time, but, of course, things did not really change in our small town in the early years. They began to with the onset of the war in 1914. And, of course, it was a great change in our family, since my dad was eligible for the draft. And he was away for some years during the war and miraculously survived until the revolutionary times began in 1917 with everything dissolving at the fronts. Units leaving the front with or without orders, scattered all through the vast spaces of, of the Ukraine and the rest of Russia. And he was among the lucky ones who made his way home. LEVINE:Well, what, do you know anything about that? I mean, why, why were people leaving the fronts and, and what was the feeling of the military, Russian military personnel of that... GOOTNICK:Of course, you realize that what I know about that, and it’s considerable, is something learned... LEVINE:Exactly. GOOTNICK:...in subsequent years. A good deal from my dad. Much more of it is in that book which I have just told you about, which is called, Oh, Say, Can You See, and deals not at all with what happened to our family after our arrival in America, because much has been written about that. It deals rather with the very chancy pilgrimage we made out of Russia, through Rumania, eventually to America. And the book tells a great deal about the atmosphere, not simply of revolutionary times which we all know about, and of which there are pictures and, and even early movies of the 1917 revolution. It applies to the major cities. Nothing of that kind is widely known, of what is happening in the hinterland, where there was utter chaos. And we were in the midst of that chaos. About the only thing which comes to mind, in recent times, a very mild example of what was going on, is what has been happening in Lebanon in the past decade or so. Every man for himself. A variety of war lords fighting for loot, for power, and complete absence of law. The laws which you and I take for granted, which we live by, which we take, we have never known any break in except what we read about in other countries. There was no such law. Anything could happen. Everything did. And we were on the receiving end as Jewish people in small towns, ‘stetle’ as they were called throughout the Ukraine. LEVINE:Well, let’s, let’s with your life up until that, that time of the revolution, or before it. Tell me your birth date and the town you were born in. GOOTNICK:My birth date was the first of March, 1910. And I know that from hearsay and from subsequent documents. The town was not really one of the small places by the local standards. It was a county seat. The name of the town was Savran. LEVINE:Spell... GOOTNICK:S-A-V-R-A-N. And it had a governing elite of a handful of officials. It had a huge police force of man, and even he was drunk most of the time. The Jewish population was very closely integrated and kept to itself, and had the function of providing certain skills and certain goods which otherwise would not have been available to the local peasantry. They came to town to buy a variety of things, herring, axle grease, many, many things which, only those things which they could not make for themselves. It was really a way of life for the peasants which had not changed in some centuries. There were no machines. There were no large scale enterprises. There were no sounds of any machines. It was on the one hand, on the peasant side, the tilling of the soil, and the sewing and harvesting of crops, and the raising of animals, and, supplemented by the hunting that they did. On the townspeople’s side, the doctor was Jewish, the pharmacist was Jewish, the, there were a group of merchants, push carts as it were, with things which they could barter for what the peasants brought in on market day, which was Thursday as a matter of fact. There was the inn, really a primitive kind of bar, serving what the peasants really came for and needed. Vodka. And quite regularly at the end of market day, the women, who had brought the produce and the chickens and everything else that they sold or bartered for the goods they needed, did not do any drinking. They were the ones who did the day’s work, and helped to pull and push and tug the drunken men at the end of the day back into the wagon and drive them home. (he chuckles) LEVINE:Now would these peasants be working somebody else's land, or would it be their own? GOOTNICK:No. This came to an end in the nineteenth century. Perhaps you are aware of Alexander the First who so called freed the serfs. Not completely. They, there was a mixture still. Many individual land holders who worked the land in their own interest, and I don’t know the exact distribution, but many who did not own the land, who as a matter of fact worked the land for absentee landlords whom they never saw, and who paid rent for the land, so that there were, there was an understanding of the roles of the owner who collected the rent, not by himself, and the roles of those who worked for him. Not too unlike the arrangements in the old south where many of the people who worked the land were not the owners of it. The man I’m named after, my father’s grandfather, Abraham, was as a matter of fact one of these agents scattered all through the Ukraine, who was the middle man between the absentee landlords and their property, the various villages, the lands, the forests. He bought and sold for a commission, and sent the proceeds, as I heard from others, back to wherever they were, in the gambling places and in the large cities scattered all over Europe where they were spending this without ever having much, some of them I understand never did visit the, the areas which were their ownership. With some exceptions. I remember still, for instance, the enormous occasion created by one of those who lived or perhaps had returned to live in the area, bought himself a huge automobile early in the century. This must have been I think sometime between 1910 and the, and the outbreak of the war, because I remember the horses shying and, and the great turmoil. No roads, by the way, except roads for wagons. LEVINE:So this the only automobile that... GOOTNICK:The only auto I ever had seen. LEVINE:Yeah. GOOTNICK:Or, or any of the people many times my age, because I was a young child, spoke it about for a long time. The chauffeur sat in front. The, the owner in was back, and it was an occasion that was talked about for a long time. LEVINE:Well, how, how were the relations between the Jewish population and the non-Jewish population? GOOTNICK:I could save everyone a great deal of time by having them read this book which we were just talking about. That’s what that deals with. LEVINE:Oh. GOOTNICK:Among many other things. And it changed. It changed somewhat between the pre-revolutionary period and the post-revolutionary period. The peasantry were dependant on what the Jewish population of the individual stetl could provide. It provided what they needed. And there was more barter than exchange of money as I recall it. But it made possible for this completely foreign community, which remained utterly unlike the surrounding population. And it was kept that way because there was no survival otherwise. LEVINE:Were there Jewish people also tilling the land and being farmers. GOOTNICK:No. Could not. They could not own land, they were not allowed to, to be part of the people who lived because of... LEVINE:They couldn’t even work somebody else land? GOOTNICK:No. LEVINE:Huh. GOOTNICK:No. They were confined to living by their wits. Including, of course, not merely, this is an expression which, which brings to mind people who fenagle, who make possible something for themselves out of nothing for others. I don’t mean it in that way. They were as I said before the, well, there was universal education among, among the Jewish population. There was not such conception as a child growing up without knowing how to read or write. LEVINE:What, what, where did you go to school? Did you go to school? GOOTNICK:I’ll get to that. Of course. Of course. LEVINE:Yeah. GOOTNICK:I really find myself repeating in a not straight forward what I have set down in my book. And, well, of course, as you ask me questions some of it will, will, will emerge. It was not just a Jewish town. There were retired officials. There were active officials. There were prosperous farmers who had owned the land and had reached an age where the land had passed on to their children who worked it, and they were retired to a townhouse. They lived on the outskirts of the town itself. They did not mingle with the Jewish population, most of whom were petty merchants. Push carts as I recall it. Or stands which only came up at the time for that market day and then were taken down. The business we had was a wholesale business. The push cart and the store keepers of various kinds bought from us. My dad travelled to the cities, made large purchases which came to the railhead about eighteen ‘vjorst [PH]’ away. And they used the clerks and, and the peasants wagons, those that were made available, to travel to the railhead and bring the goods to us, which then filled a huge basement under the store. LEVINE:What kind of things. What, what, what kind of store did he have? GOOTNICK:Name it. (he chuckles) It was not, things, there were things which were not perishable goods. Barrels of herring, for instance, which was salted, came from the Scandinavian countries, I understand, and could last forever. They were edible for as long as, there all kinds of tools for the peasants. There were barrels of grease, because they all needed axle grease. There were many barrels of kerosene which they used for lighting. You know, lamps. Bolts of clothe, for instance, which were sold to the small merchants, and which were sold by the yard, however, to the people who came in from the, from their fields to buy. Does that give you some idea of... LEVINE:Yes. Did your father start this business himself... GOOTNICK:He did. LEVINE:...or was this a family... GOOTNICK:He did. I come of a large rabbinical family where father and son, on both sides, by the way, sort of passed on the tradition that the children would be learned in the rabbinical tradition. They all went to yeshiva, and they came out and were ordained and parcelled out to various small or larger communities as rabbis for those communities. My dad, when he was an adolescent, rebelled against that. He was a very bright man all his life. His picture is in the book. And he and several other of the young people, and this was before the revolution, because he was born in 1878. Toward the end of the nineteenth century these young people were a part of the burgeoning Zionist idea. You have perhaps heard of Dr. Herzel? He was one of the many. There were people writing Hebrew poetry. There were people writing Hebrew books. And the entire idea, especially, especially after the 1905 pogroms, as usual, when the czarist regime suffered a setback at the loss of the Russo-Japanese war, it followed, there were rumblings of possible uprisings in the various cities, not in our area. And the time tested means of settling these was to get the various black hundreds as they were called to rouse the local peasantry to progromize [sic] the Jewish towns which were scattered through the Ukraine and through much of Russia. When I grew up it was just past the last wave of such a pogrom, one of these pogroms as described in there. And the Jews having no alternative buried their dead and tended their wounded, and drew closer together, and made a life again because there was no alternative to that. LEVINE:Well, tell me what you remember of your life as a young boy in the Ukraine. The town was in the Ukraine? GOOTNICK:In the Ukraine. It was about, oh, I would say two hundred ‘vjorst’ north of Odessa. Odessa is a well known city on the Black Sea. And this was in the heart of, of, of the hinterland I suppose you’d call it. Rich soil carved out of an eternal forest. That entire area for hundreds and hundreds of miles is one. I don’t know what it’s like now after the, after the past World War Two. Because tempted as I have been there has just not been time or opportunity to, to go back and see the places where I was a child. What life was like then is a very large question. I’ll tell you some of the things which may, which may be of interest. I started by telling you about my father. He did not want to continue, these young people thought themselves Russian. They read Russian books. They, in their travels as business people, met Russians who were utterly unlike the illiterate peasantry around us. More educated people. Business people many of them. And they were inflamed by the first echoes of what was to become the Zionist movement. This, by the way, was strongly discourage by the elders of the town. In our town as elsewhere. They saw in it nothing but danger to the community. And the, from outside. And a larger danger to the community from inside. An unravelling of the tightly held traditions of orthodox Jewish observance, of cleaving to ourselves, of dressing differently, speaking differently, to maintain the difference between ourselves and the Russian people surrounding us. And these young people were venturing out. And when my dad rebelled against this and wanted out of the yeshiva, he wrote to his grandfather, after whom I am named, who was a much more worldly man. He dealt with people outside the stetl and very successfully, and was a great traveller and negotiator. To save him from this confinement because he wanted to be more like him. And he, he found the right place to appeal, because the old boy was then, he lived to be in the nineties, I don’t know exactly how long, wrote to his son, that is my father’s father, who was a great and renowned scholar, but a very puritanical and tyrannical man, who held to the notion that any departure of the strictest observance, any departure from the separateness was a threat to, to Jewish life. And so my name’s sake and great grandfather wrote to his son saying, ‘I need him in my business. He’s going to stop going to the yeshiva and help me out.’ This was the excuse which he used. And indeed that’s what happened for a while. (he chuckles) Until my dad grew a little older and he set him up in business for himself. And my dad was very successful in the business. We had one of the two or three largest houses right next to the sto-, on the main street, the only street that was cobbled. What else can I tell you about what the life there was like. You get the feeling of the isolation of the permanently threatened community, which built itself up in times when things were peaceful, and suffered time and again under the threat of extermination, but less than complete extermination. LEVINE:What was your father’s name? GOOTNICK:Jacob. LEVINE:Jacob. And your mother’s name? GOOTNICK:Sara. LEVINE:And her maiden name? GOOTNICK:Sindler. My mother’s father also was a rabbi. An exceptional person. As strict and unbending as my father’s father was. So wise, witty, happy, laughing and beloved. Just as learned was her father who lived in a smaller town, not a county seat, oh, perhaps a day’s ride away. LEVINE:How do spell her maiden name? GOOTNICK:S-I-N-D-L-E-R. Sara Sindler. LEVINE:Now, do you remember any experiences with either set of grandparents? GOOTNICK:Very well. LEVINE:What do you remember about them? GOOTNICK:Very well. I remember the contrast between these two experiences. In my grandfather’s home where, he was of course, in Savran also, everything from a child’s point of view was strict. You had to watch your step. You had to watch what you said. There was never any laughter, even though my grandmother, my father’s mother, was an apple-cheeked, wonderful, loving and sweet person. The only woman I have, the first woman I have ever loved, and the only one who I loved in a very special way. There was never a time when I was there that she didn’t have cookies for my pocket, where she didn’t have a laugh and stories, a wonderful, wonderful person. Unforgettable. In contrast with this household were the times when my mother and I being the youngest would take a trip for her to see her parents. There were always visitors from every part of the Ukraine, rabbinical students, whoever, in, in that house. He was both the cantor for that community and the rabbi for that community. And open handed, open hearted, smiling, singing, and welcoming. It was a contrast which I remember my dad tried to explain to me never quite successfully. LEVINE:Do you remember any activities that you would do with either... GOOTNICK:You asked me about... LEVINE:...grandparents? GOOTNICK:You asked me about schooling? LEVINE:Yeah. GOOTNICK:The activity with my mother’s father was easy. I remember myself on his knee and him telling me stories. Funny stories. From Shahlah Melechem [PH]. And the, stories that made me laugh. It was just a joyous experience. I was, of course, like every Jewish child at age three perhaps, perhaps four, but usually that would be late, set for ‘Chedah [PH].’ Chedah being as you may know the kind of kindergarten or first grade for Jewish, where what they were taught were certain prayers by rote. And the, the, the learning was repetitious. If you were reasonable bright you knew everything that the teacher had to, to teach you within the first week, and forever after you were just dumbfounded by the way the same thing went on again and again, because perhaps other children would not quite catch on quite so quickly as you may have. It was a prison sentence of a kind. I describe it here. (he indicates his book) Here are a few pictures which cannot be heard, but, of my father, and the, some others. LEVINE:So, you, well, first let me ask this. You were the baby? So, you... GOOTNICK:I was the baby. LEVINE:And what were your brothers and sisters names? GOOTNICK:I had an older sister who is ailing now and still alive. LEVINE:Is that Lillian? GOOTNICK:Lillian. A very beautiful girl. I remember her. Still beautiful. LEVINE:Yeah. GOOTNICK:And an older brother. His picture is not here. I could not find one. He died some years ago. He by the time I went to ‘chedah [PH]’ was already grown and then studying elsewhere. LEVINE:And his name? GOOTNICK:David. LEVINE:David. So it was Lillian, David... GOOTNICK:David and I. LEVINE:And you. GOOTNICK:David the oldest, Lillian next, and I. LEVINE:Okay. Okay. Well, I think we’ll pause here and turn over the tape. And then we’ll continue with the decision to come. END OF SIDE ONE, TAPE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE LEVINE:Okay, we’ll resume now on side B. What were the circumstances and the decisions to be made as far as your decision to come here? GOOTNICK:(he pauses) The decisions that had to be made were forced on us by the chaos which followed the 1917 revolution. All those millions of soldiers who were freed when the war was over for Russia in 1917, most of them went back to their farms or to the towns they had come from. And the revolutionary period did not end when the Bolsheviks took over in Petrograd. That was only the beginning. Many of the military units were controlled by czarist officers who fought against the Bolsheviks. And this went on all through the length and breadth of Russia. We knew the part that went on in our area which was the Ukraine, where the warlord in control was Petlyura. P-E-T-L-Y-U-R-A is the closest to that sound. In time as they were losing the war to the Bolshevik armies, what happened to these military units that fought against the ‘Reds’ and which were known as the ‘Whites’, they began to break up into what was no longer a military or controlled war making machine. There were smaller and smaller groups of horsemen who ranged throughout the land for loot, who fought each other, and who were especially dangerous when they came to one stetl or another. The way they saw it, if they attacked a village for food or a father for their horses, the, the ‘mouzhiks [PH]’ would fight. The people had no defense whatever. What the Jewish communities and the scattered stetle, where there were goods, where there were shoes, where there were boots, where there was food, where there was, they thought, silver and gold, coins, money. And those were the people who, who’s assaults were murderous and swift. They would come, stay a day, a couple of nights, and out, to range the countryside elsewhere after having despoiled what they could in this town. And before long another one would come by. And this went on for years. What I describe in my book is the period between 1918 and 1920, ‘21. I have chapters which are called ‘The Summer of Troubles,’ ‘The Winter of Troubles.’ The only thing which promised some hope of survival, since we could not fight them, not having the arms... LEVINE:Well, you could have gotten arms. No? GOOTNICK:Well, there is a chapter here of an attempt to organize a band of young men who could defend the community. And I describe in that book how they came to grief in the first attempt, and no other attempt was made. The thing to do was to hide. There were some hiding places in attics and basements in various houses, which were not conspicuous and which offered some hope of, of remaining hidden and not, and not discovered. My dad and my older and brother with me helping, or perhaps more in the way than helping, dug under one bedroom. They were parquet floors. And my dad was very skillful with his hands. He managed to cut the flooring in such a way that it could be restored at, to become unnoticeable, especially with a rug over it. And a lot of earth was dug out, and a lot of board were used to hold back the earth from an area of perhaps five or six feet by five or six feet. And supplies of unspoiling [sic] food, sugar, whatever, and water. Because these visitations by marauding bands were, with some exceptions, just twenty-four, forty-eight hours and, and that’s all. But because you could be watchful during the day and not so watchful during the night, we made it a habit when that was finished to sleep in our own hideaway. Yes. And we had a series of signs. Certain knocks on the flooring above us. My grandfather knew about it. Couple of neighbors knew about it. And... LEVINE:Now, this is in an area of five to six feet? GOOTNICK:Yes. LEVINE:And how many of you were sleeping down there? GOOTNICK:Five of us. One was usually on, on watch, so the four of us were sleeping there. LEVINE:Oh. GOOTNICK:During the day, those who had not slept enough could sleep while other were on watch. And this went on for many months. Occasionally we hid with neighbor’s places, similarly arranged. The decisions to which you referred had to be made. Obviously people, the Jewish communities in places like Odessa, for instance, which was not all that far away. My dad was visiting it in normal times quite frequently on business. But the way to get there was not safe at all. Young men who had been serving as clerks in our business got together to escape, and their bodies were brought back the very next day. The roads were not safe. And we finally made a decision when there was no other way it was clear that we had used up most of our luck in staying alive. We chanced it. I describe it in detail in the story as to what we went through before we got there. But we got there. And not that Jews were very much more popular there, but they were a cohesive unit which could not be dealt with without fighting, as, as we were, because they were more protected, there was more, things could happen, and did happen, which eventually forced us out of Odessa. But they did not happen to us because we were Jewish. They happened because it was a city wide calamity of hunger and chaos, and no authority, and everybody fighting everybody else for, for means of survival. So eventually we made it to a place called Kominka [PH] on the border with... LEVINE:Rumania? GOOTNICK:Bessarabia [PH]. Rumania. Bessarabia was then part of Rumania. After World War Two it came back to, to Russia. LEVINE:Who were travelling with then? GOOTNICK:We travelled in two groups. My dad, my brother and I, and my mother and my sister separately. They remained behind to clean up. We had a store there where after we, we arrived in Odessa, and we lived there for a year and a half or so. At first it was fine, and then things began to be much, much worse. In 1921 there was a Ukraine-wide famine where people fared not much better than they fared in Somalia recently. All people. Seed grain was eaten. Cattles [sic] were, cattle was butchered. There were not dairy farms or anything left, with exceptions possibly. But there were, there was not any coherent authority to bring from areas which were rich in grain, the Ukraine was the bread basket for much of Europe in those days, to parts which needed it. It was a nationwide disaster which lasted and lasted and lasted. And eventually we made our way across the Dniester River, which is the border the town we were in. LEVINE:Were you, were you sneaking across the border? GOOTNICK:Yes. LEVINE:Uh-huh. GOOTNICK:We risked our life, the third time we made it. The first time we were captured before we even reached the river. And the second time we, it was in the wintertime. LEVINE:When you were captured what happened to you? GOOTNICK:Well, we were arrested, robbed and dismissed. There was nothing really much that they could do with us. The second time we nearly died because an enormous blizzard blew up when we were in the open fields. And it was by luck that we found the barracks of a unit which had not ventured forth to do any patrolling in this weather. And our life was saved. We were brought back to Kominka, robbed again and then... LEVINE:Hmm. GOOTNICK:...and we found ourselves back again after all this. Eventually the third time we made it. And we came to Kishinev, K-I-S-H-I-N-E-V, in Rumania, in Bessarabia. Thereafter we made our living in the usual way. We dug out some gold coins which had been sewn in our hems and cuffs and bought a little store in the marketplace, and eked out a living. We got the papers without which there was no hope of reaching America from my Uncle Eli. LEVINE:Now where was Eli? GOOTNICK:Eli was a notable cantor in the foremost synagogue in Brooklyn. Had been for years. LEVINE:Oh. GOOTNICK:Well off. Owned his own house. And he was the one who made it possible for us ever to dream of reaching America. We were in Odessa when it came to us that papers for any member of the Gootnick family who survived, to make themselves known, to make their way to Rumania, and we would be helped to come to America. This is the Eli who’s picture you just saw. LEVINE:Wow. So, you, so then you were in correspondence, or your family was... GOOTNICK:No. LEVINE:...when you were in Rumania? GOOTNICK:There was no correspondence. After 1914, when we were at war... LEVINE:Then it was... GOOTNICK:That was cut off from the rest of the world. And by the time of the pogroms and the revolutionary period it was still cut off. But they sent messengers to Rumania. And the group of people who knew each other and who were from the same part of the country elected a well off man, who subsequently became our friend. And he came to the borders on the Rumanian side, and paid smugglers to distribute papers, letters to the various, one of the letters he sent which was received in Savran by my grandfather, he sent it on to us in Odessa, because we corresponded with him by courier, when people were going back and forth. LEVINE:So this person was someone who was from the same group or... GOOTNICK:This messenger who was sent on behalf of all these people? LEVINE:Well, yes. GOOTNICK:Yes. Yes, he was one of the group. A contemporary of my uncle’s who had come to America, had done very well here as a business man, just as my uncle had done very well as a cantor. And... LEVINE:And so he was helping his people. GOOTNICK:He was helping his people. Yes. There was no commu-, he didn’t know who had survived this chaotic period. And so he sent word out, and my grandfather got word back to him across, because the courier who brought the letters said, ‘I can take the letter back.’ And so he pointed out those members of the family that he knew had survived were in Odessa. LEVINE:Oh. GOOTNICK:And eventually made our way, it was no certainty that we would come to America. Most of the people who crowd of Kishinev [sic] in hopes of papers from in America did not make. They went to various other places, to Palestine, to Argentina, to, some made their way to Canada. And we were the lucky, lucky ones who managed to reach the United States. LEVINE:So, then what? Were you then in contact with your Uncle Eli? GOOTNICK:Yes, from Kishinev. LEVINE:Uh-huh. GOOTNICK:We were in contact with him. And there’s one story. I don’t know whether you have time for that. My dad when to Bucharest where the American consulate was, and waited for days before his number was reached. He had to wait on line. And when he came there they told him, ‘We cannot promise you anything.’ He said, ‘But I’ve been here almost two years. My family’s been here more than a year.’ He came across the river by himself first to make contact with Uncle Eli. ‘And you’re telling me now that we may not make it?’ She says, ‘Do you see all these lines waiting for the same thing that your waiting for?’ He told me this story afterwards. Said, this is a woman interviewing him. And he stood up and said, ‘It would have been much better if we had died in Russia than to come here and survive all the perils of the trip, and of crossing the border in secret, and waiting for word, all the papers in order, and now not making it.’ He told me after he saw her face change. LEVINE:Hmm. GOOTNICK:And she said, ‘Wait. I’ll be back in a few minutes.’ But she came back later, she showed him a passport picture, the passport picture, his and ours. We had our passport pictures taken in expectation of what. And she says, ‘This is your wife? It seems to me that she is with child. And we sometimes on rare occasions make exceptions.’ He told he did not deny that there was such a thing. She said to him, ‘I want to give you some hope. Go back to Kishinev. You should hear from us in maybe two or three weeks. We’ll send you a telegram. When you get the telegram, that means that you will have your visa. Bring everybody here.’ And that’s how it turned out. LEVINE:So three weeks you got the telegram? GOOTNICK:We got the telegram. We were the envy of all her friends, where they’re waiting, some of them, longer than we had. And we made our way to Bucharest, and got the visa, used the very last coins. Gold coins, I remember. I had them in my lapel and I had them in the cuffs of my pants. And so did every member of the family to pay for our passage. I am not clear, it seems to me, I seem to recollect something in a letter from Uncle Eli saying that if you cannot pay for, I will take care of it. But my dad replied, we can make, we can pay for our passage. And we had enough to pay for passage, not in steerage, but in a cabin on the steerage floor. LEVINE:Third class. GOOTNICK:But in a cabin for us four. My older brother, whom we had put across the Dniester early to make contact with Uncle Eli, somehow got lured away to be one of the pioneers, ‘chalutsim [PH]’ as we called them, to go to Palestine with other Jewish young men. That’s a separate story. He joined us years later in America. LEVINE:Uh-huh. Okay, so, where did you take the ship from? GOOTNICK:Constanta. We had an overnight trip to Constanta, the port of Constanta on the Black Sea. And there was this huge Megali Hellas, the ship. And we were weary from the night’s trip without a wink of sleep. And trudged up the long gang plank, all our papers, pictures compared. We were carefully examined by the ship’s officers, and lead downstairs to steerage with a separate, one wall of steerage held several cabins, and we had bought one of these cabins. With bunks up and down. Small place. I’m sure no larger than this small room. And when we came, I don’t if there is time in this interview for one more heart wrenching episode. The September, the August quota, we arrived in the last half hour of the 31st of August. It turns out that the quote was already filled for August. And we were at anchor and being told that we’re going to have to go back. September quota was already organized. We could not encroach on that. And we waited for several days, for, because there was an outcry in the Jewish community in New York. We were in New York Harbor. We had made it. And now we were to be shipped back. And so we got the papers. People came out on small boats. Then we got the forward and other papers. And we realized that the enormous hullaballooh was being made about this in Washington. And in the papers. For the purpose of the book, I resurrected the files from the New York Public Library. What was being written in the papers to, in the New York World, in the New York Tribune. I forget the, what other papers there were. Large headlines of the battles of, of words that were going on. And eventually word came we were to be included in the September quota and would be allowed to land. LEVINE:How long were you... GOOTNICK:Several days. LEVINE:...in the harbor, on the ship? GOOTNICK:We were in limbo... LEVINE:Uh-huh. GOOTNICK:...waiting. We were not being shipped back, but there was, well, there was some hope, but not much hope. So we took a ferry to Ellis Island, and... LEVINE:What was your experience here? Describe that. GOOTNICK:It was an experience which was unforgettable. Perhaps more so to a child, although I was no longer a child of thirteen. Huge room, the largest room I had ever seen. High dome. Long, long lines of people in various groups. And at the far end, small desk, a person in uniform. And as we drew near we saw that there were people crying and wailing because they were held back for one reason or another. The reason was that the cursory examination, which so far as I can recall was a tap or two on the back, a stethoscope held to the heart area for a second, and especially attention paid to eyes. The, the, fearful, that contagious illness trachoma was what they especially, and there were people held back and sent to quarantine apparently for a variety of reasons. There was a cough, if they heard things, if the lungs were perhaps impaired, tuberculosis was things that would keep you out. We made it right through. And within that line, lasted for perhaps a couple of hours until our turn was reached, every one of us, my father, my mother and my sister and I were held to be not too threatening to the well being of the United States. And I cannot describe the joy, the discovery of a life of which we had heard about and read in my uncle’s letters, was life on another planet. Hope, peace, safety, all kinds of possibilities. Everything that you with your capacities could attain. LEVINE:So, what did you, did your uncle meet you? GOOTNICK:Yes. LEVINE:Did your Uncle Eli meet you? GOOTNICK:Yes. LEVINE:Do you remember that meeting? GOOTNICK:Well, actually, a younger who had made his way to America, also brought out by Uncle Eli to avoid the Russian draft, which a sentence of death, before the 1914 outbreak of war, he was the one who met us. We were free at Ellis Island. And he had a car. And we crowded into the car. And he took us to the meeting with Uncle Eli and Uncle Eli’s family and his own family. LEVINE:In Brooklyn? GOOTNICK:In Brooklyn. In Brooklyn. And they had a, an apartment ready for us. And an ice box with, and literally in ice box, not a refrigerator, filled with food. And we were in a new space ship, and a land such as we had never known. Within a week the two youngsters and, of Uncle Louis, who was the younger uncle, took me to the nearby school, Public School Number Seventy-Two in East New York. And I, not knowing a word of English, although I had been a bright boy and had been two years ahead of myself in gymnasia of Peter the Great in Odessa, second year of gymnasia, which is equivalent to second year of high school, and here I was put in the fourth grade, and watched and listened and learned. After the first three or four weeks, I was skipped each week to the next grade up to teachers who were magnificent, caring and helpful, until I reached Eight B as it was then called. And it was still a couple of months to the end of the year by the time I got there. And I remember still how Miss North welcomed me. If there is time. Do you have some minutes? LEVINE:I think what we’re going to have to do is put on another, well, yeah, why don’t you tell this story. GOOTNICK:This is a story which is worth telling. By the time I reached Eight B, a tall, New England, spinsterish types, type, stern faced, greeted me, introduced me to the class as a newcomer. And this had been the class already for perhaps several months. And I could speak, but an atrocious accent. And it made everybody laugh. She didn’t say anything about that for a while. But several, after several days, since I could speak quite well, but it was still a new language to me, she called on me and I said something which made everybody roar. It sounded, it must have sounded funny. She held up her hand, stopped the class, and said, ‘How many of you think you can do better than Abraham?’ That’s what she called me. Abraham. ‘How many of you think that finding yourself in a Russian school would have learned in three or four months what Abraham has learned in English?’ It was quiet. I was terrible embarrassed. She was castigated them for something, which I could understand, and didn’t really mind very much. ‘I want never again to hear you making fun of Abraham while I am the teacher here.’ Shortly thereafter she gave an assignment to the class. ‘Bring in a story, or an article, whatever. You write it. Everyone has to write it, and bring it in here.’ And I brought in a story which I concocted. And she stopped the class again. ‘I want you, I want to read you something. This was written by Abraham.’ What was the title of the story? ‘Was it fate,’ was the title of it. Nothing tremendous. But it was well written. You couldn’t tell from reading it that this was written by a foreigner. If they had heard me reading it they would have known immediately. And that was it. She read it and she congratulated me, and came graduation and all that. There was the summer and I had a summer job. On a Saturday morning I think, we lived in the area in that apartment that I told you about. And there was a knock on the door. And a young man, perhaps in his twenties, says, ‘Is this the Gootnick home?’ I answered the door. I said, I said, ‘Yes.’ My mother was in the kitchen. Not speaking English yet. And he said, ‘Well, do you know a Miss North?’ I said, ‘Yes. She was my teacher in the eighth grade.’ He said, ‘She sent in a story that you wrote with a letter and thought that we might be interested in printing it. I want to know something about you. When did you get to this country?’ And I told him the 5th of September, 1923. This was now the summer of 1924 when I was to start high school in September. And he said, ‘Really? Well, who wrote it for you?’ I said, ‘Nobody wrote it for me. Nobody in my family know English as yet.’ He said, ‘So you wrote it? And is this your mother?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘I want to ask her some questions.’ I said, ‘Please.’ And he turns to her and starts speaking in English. LEVINE:Okay, we’re going to have to pause right here to turn the tape, but we’ll get the end of it on the other side, or a new tape. END OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE ONE, TAPE TWO LEVINE:Okay, this is tape two. I’m speaking with Abraham Gootnick. And we’re at Ellis Island in the Oral History Studio. You were in the middle of a story about the reporter coming to your home. GOOTNICK:Yes. The young reporter that was somewhat skeptical that anyone who had been in the country a number of months could have written this story. He was finally convinced, or it seemed so to me. And before he left, he said, ‘Well, this is going to appear in ‘The Sunday World’ about ten days from now,’ or he gave me the number of days. This was a Saturday, and it would be almost two weeks, about two weeks from then. ‘Look for it.’ Well, of course I would look for it. When the time came I was up early in the morning. I went out and got the Sunday paper. And I scanned it and I took it apart and couldn’t find it. Just about then the phone rang. My uncle’s house. He says, ‘Have you seen your picture in the paper?’ I said, ‘I can’t find it.’ So he have me the precise page number and the section number, and there it was. A picture of me. (they laugh) And a story about me, and a reprint of the story which I had written. This, too, went by the board when the house was sold. LEVINE:What a, what a wonderful accolade. I mean, having been here for such a short time... GOOTNICK:That’s what... LEVINE:...to have that happen. GOOTNICK:That, that is the reason. It was the seeming contradiction between a very short time in the country, and Miss North’s letter testifying to the fact that I had been only since the fall. (he chuckles) And they wrote about it, and reprinted the story and had my picture in there. Big deal. LEVINE:So, how did, how did you feel? I mean, do you think that had some kind of a spurning influence on what you, what you did later? I mean... GOOTNICK:No. LEVINE:No. GOOTNICK:No. As you will read, when you read the book... LEVINE:Yeah. GOOTNICK:Writing was not new to me. My dad was the only who appreciated it. I don’t think that my, my siblings liked it very much, because I excelled in school, and wrote in Russia. And that is still so. Poetry is the artistic element which moves everyone. There is no town of any size, no city where the old tradition of poetry readings is not still maintained, so I understand. And so the thing that drew me early on was to write verse. I imagine as I remember it. None of it survives fortunately. A rather ponderous. Rhyme was very important. And scanning was important. It had to be like a metronome. And the usual sentiments of beautiful evenings and marvelous forests and parks and whatever it was that moved me eventually wound up there. LEVINE:Do you remember anything about the, what was the name of your story that was printed? GOOTNICK:’Was It Fate?’ LEVINE:’Was It Fate?’ GOOTNICK:It had to do, it had to do, as I recall it, I wish I had a copy, with a chance escape by someone. A narrow escape from some danger. And a celebration of the fact that the threat of losing one’s life was just past. And it turns out the surprise part was it was merely a postponement of the inevitable, that having escaped a threat and celebrating, finally he’s victimized and dies. Hence the title. LEVINE:Well, now, what kinds of things struck you as different about being in the United States during those, that early time when you were here. Do you remember anything? GOOTNICK:I remember it so distinctly, more as a feeling. And perhaps I can, perhaps I may not translate that feeling for you. The streets, the assumptions of peace and safety, which had not been assumptions at any times previously in my life, varying only in the imminence and the severity. But to feel that life is secure, that life is predictable, that you can start from here, and by using yourself and learning and trying, you can arrive elsewhere. That all things are possible. It was like being transplanted to another planet. I remember distinctly the strong feeling which stayed with me, and occasionally still comes to me, when I think of, of my childhood and Russia. As a transfer, not simply from one community to another, not simply from one language to another, but from one state of being to another. People who live in constant chaos and constant danger, where not necessarily someone threatening you or wanting bad things to happen to you. It is just that it is completely unpredictable. You go to bed not knowing whether you will awake in the morning. You get up in the morning not knowing what the day would bring except it would bring certain things that, that threaten you. This was by degrees. Not all at once. Evaporating over a period of months. Years, really. LEVINE:So what ha-, how do you think having come here as an immigrant and, and finding a whole new world really, how do you thing that effected the rest of your life, I mean, from the time you graduated high school? GOOTNICK:I will tell you this. And I find examples of it, which sometimes in conversation with others seem to puzzle those who were born in this country, and who come of generations of people who had been born in this country. You would think that the most patriotic people in America are those who are well establish in America, who come of families many generations in America, to whom the country truly belongs, and who are more of America than newcomers. And I have discovered progressively that the truly patriotic people in America are those, who either themselves or within a generation and sometimes of two, have known of the opposite of what is best about America. The freedoms which the old generations now take for granted, how can it be otherwise, are not taken for granted by the Polish people who came to the Midwest, are not taken for granted by the Scandinavian who were settled in Minnesota, are not taken for granted by the Italian who came here, many of them illiterate, from low states of living in a country where you could not aspire to anything beyond what your father accomplished, and discovered their capacities in this country where everyone was given the chance to make that discovery. They are the patriots. There is no more patriotic person in the country than I am. And it’s old fashioned now. And I have many friends who feel, ‘Oh, you’re a republican.’ (they laugh) They, I am not surprised that they take for granted what they find themselves in. Their prosperity for one thing. But more than that. Less so now, by the way. The open road through schools where people care to help you. The easy appreciation of everyone concerned of the fact that you are using yourself in common aim. The professors who, all the way from that Miss North I just told you about, who made my way easy simply because they appreciated the fact I was trying. I could tell you a brief story, which is a heartening story and gives you some idea why I considered my life as a remarkable succession of fortunate accidents. LEVINE:Okay. GOOTNICK:I was on full scholarship at New York University by virtue of the fact I had done well in high school, even though I had an after school job all through my high school years. And it was just as well because we were not well funded at home, and it didn’t cost me anything to go to college. And I did well enough at school to get onto the New York University School of Medicine. Not only was I on a full scholarship, but I also received a state scholarship from the Regents in New York State by virtue of my record in high school. So the four years were as I recall a hundred dollars a year that I received as well as a scholarship. After two and half years at Washington Square College at N.Y.U., I was admitted to the medical school because of my special record. I was number one in the pre-medical course. And I took it for granted that of the two years of my scholarship which still remained that it would be transferred to the medical by virtue of the fact that it was the same university. I was wrong about that. I was given to understand that I would have to pay in full even for the two years without having used the last two years of my scholarship. This was terrible because times were not good after 1929. And this was 1930. I had made friends with so many of the faculty. A special friend was Dr. Scott., in history, a history professor. And I went to talk to him. Said, if it means that I have to give up an idea of going to medical school even though they’ve accepted me, and in those days it was something to be accepted because there was so much competition by innumerable, bright people, all of whom would make good doctors. He said, ‘Just a minute. Just a minute. They will not transfer the scholarship money to the medical school? Why is that.’ I said, ‘That appears to be what I was told.’ Said, ‘Let me look into it.’ Come and talk to me on a particular day. I came and talked to him on the day. He said, he says, ‘There’s hope.’ I says, ‘What?’ He says, ‘One of the trustees of the university is a friend of mine. A wonderful lady. She wants to meet you. Do you have a suit that you can where?’ (they laugh) I said, ‘Yes, I have a suit that I can where.’ And I met him, and he took me to this overwhelming Park Avenue apartment. It looked the size of a skating rink. And hobbling to meet us was this elderly lady with a cane, smiling. ‘Oh, Dr. Scott told me all about you, Mr. Gootnick. Come in, sit down. What would you like,’ and all that. ‘I have good news for you. I have made inquiries. This scholarship will be extended to your first two years of medical to complete the four years for which it was granted.’ I forget her name now, of which I’m ashamed to admit. I thanked her. And she made off, ‘It’s nothing, nothing, nothing. It’s only the right thing to do.’ And finally made our good-byes. There’s a sequel to this story. I kept in touch with Dr. Scott because I revered him and was grateful to him. And one of the times I came to see him, he says to me, ‘I have sad news for you. You remember the lady who made it possible to get the scholarship transferred?’ I said, ‘Of course. How is she.’ ‘She died about a week ago. Maybe I should have told you and you would have come to the funeral.’ ‘Of course I would have,’ I said. ‘I have something to say to you now that I couldn’t while she was alive.’ ‘Oh?’ He says, ‘She was unable to change the arrangements about the scholarship. She just made a contribution.’ LEVINE:Wow. That’s beautiful. Yeah. Well, we’re going to run out of time again if we’re not careful. (they laugh) GOOTNICK:Yes. LEVINE:You have too many good stories. Let’s, let me ask you then, so you went through N.Y.U. Medical School? GOOTNICK:That’s right. LEVINE:And then... GOOTNICK:And I went across the street for my internship and residency at Bellevue Hospital. LEVINE:And then, how about he military? Were you at any point... GOOTNICK:Well, the, the, I was a physician in practice. And it was 194-, I was married by then... LEVINE:Tell me your wife’s name. GOOTNICK:My wife was a beautiful girl named Thelma Marchbein. M-A-R-C-H-B-E-I-N. She had come as a child with her family at age nine, I believe. The father after arriving here in 1921 promptly died of a bleeding ulcer, leaving a woman with three children, one infant. One of those three was an infant, the younger brother of my wife’s, to make her way in this strange country. LEVINE:From what country did she come? GOOTNICK:From Russia. LEVINE:From Russia. GOOTNICK:Yes. Did not know the language. Had members of the family here, who helped to bring them here. This was the usual arrangement. And she grew up to see her mother trying to fashion a living, keeping a small store, a neighborhood store. And the mother was a woman of parts. We have a Hebrew saying, ‘Eishes Chaihl [PH],’ ‘a woman of valor.’ She succeeded where no one else could have by virtue of brains, persistence, unlimited attention to work. Made a living for the family, and my wife to be helped out and eventually went to work, and to give her mother a two week vacation once a year, would take over the running of the store during her own vacation. And it was a remarkable family. LEVINE:How did you meet? GOOTNICK:(he laughs) We, the communities from one town, or one area who had reached America tended to be together. Charitable concerns which they shared and social activities. ‘Landsleiter [PH],’ was the term. Just as our Savran group was active together and kept in close contact with each other, so did the group from the stetl where my wife’s family originated. And it turned out that an uncle of my wife’s married a girl of the Savran group. And so everyone, it was a huge wedding, was asked to come. I was still interning at Bellevue Hospital at the time. And since I was asked, every member of the family was asked, I had to go. I didn’t have a suit by that time. (he laughs) But my roommate at Bellevue had two. And he said, ‘Which one do you like?’ He was, we were about the same size. So I got dressed up and went to the wedding. And there was a gorgeous girl who wanted to teach me to dance. She taught me a lot of things for fifty-three years thereafter. LEVINE:Tell me your children’s names. GOOTNICK:My older daughter, Harriet, who was married to a remarkable man who was professor of physics at the University of Virginia. And since she is remarkable and he is remarkable, they have two remarkable children who are my grandchildren. LEVINE:And what is her last name now? GOOTNICK:Harriet Noble. He is Professor Julian Noble. I won’t go into the business of publicizing my grandchildren because that would take us way past where we should be. (she laughs) My younger daughter married, when she left graduate school at Columbia, she walked downst-, downtown and found herself a job with the physics society. Turns out they have their home right near the United Nations. I forget the particular street. Forty-something Street. And it’s inhabited by Nobel laureates of various years. And before very long they all cherished her. She was in charge of arranging conferences and all the rest. She ran the place. Hidden away in the library was a man writing his Ph.D. thesis, a young man, who couldn’t take his eyes off her. She’d come to the library to eat his lunch, and he’s there for whatever reasons he had. And before long she brought him home, and he is research director and has been for many years of a think tank in Philadelphia. And they have the boy who’s picture I showed you. LEVINE:Uh-huh. And tell me your, that daughter’s name and her husband’s name. GOOTNICK:Lois and Henry Small. Dr. Henry Gilbert Small. And my grandson’s name is Matthew Small. He’s now in his second year at Oberlin. LEVINE:Well, tell me about your life. I mean, how, when you think of your life here, and you think about your coming here as an immigrant, I think I may have actually touched on this before, but do you think that changed you in some way, the whole experience of that? GOOTNICK:My wife must be quoted at this point. Around, at the dinner table a conversation that came to, they wanted to know what, what went on, what’s the chemistry. She says, ‘We change each other. All the time.’ It’s a two way thing. The immigrants of the past century have changed America from what it had been before that century in a million ways, some of which you can see every time you look at your skyline here. And of course it changed me. I have mentioned already, and more than once, how fortunate I have been and the people I have met, and everyone who made my road easier. I was an academic physician for a good part of my career. And for a while I was chief of cardiology at the then new veteran’s hospital, which is not far from here in Brooklyn by the Narrows. The Brooklyn Veteran’s Hospital. At that time with one wife, two children, two cars to maintain, the salaries were not good. It was very wonderful for me because I could do a lot of clinical research, and I was useful in learning things and teaching. But they were building at that time the Long Island Jewish Hospital, and not far away the North Shore University Hospital. And I was asked to be chief of cardiology at the Long Island Jewish, and to be a senior attending at the North Shore. So living in the area, I quit my job. I remained as a consultant at the veteran’s hospital. And started out a private practice as a board certified internist and board certified cardiologist. And before long there was so many patients referred that I needed help, and picked first one bright resident as my associate, and then a second one. And through the fifties and through the 1960’s my office was in a medical building not far from the North Shore University Hospital. And we had a group which I headed and which was very successful. And I said in the book that I have always been thankful for the inestimable privilege of a physician’s life. And it is not simply the privilege of working at something you like and making a living. It is the enormous privilege of participating in people’s lives. LEVINE:I don’t think there’s anything better to say as a closing statement. I want to thank you very much. This has really been a privilege. And I thank you very much for giving to the library here, (she clears her throat) excuse me, your book, Oh Say, Can You See. Also Chaos and a Dream of Peace is the, is the title. And I’ve been speaking with Dr. Abraham Gootnick, and it’s October 4th. We’re at the Ellis Island Immigration Museum, and this is Janet Levine signing off for the National Park Service. GOOTNICK:Thank you, Miss Levine. LEVINE:Thank you very much.