LEVINE: This is Janet Levine for the National Park Service, and I'm here today in Clifton, New Jersey. It's November 22, 1992. And I'm here with Armen Hanisian, and Mr. Hanisian's daughter, Virginia Atanian, is here with us. And Mr. Hanisian came from Syria. He is Armenian. He came from Syria in 1920 when he was twenty years of age. Well, I'm very happy to be here, and I'm looking forward to hearing your story. HANISIAN: You're welcome, I'm sure. LEVINE: Okay. Mr. Hanisian, why don't you start by telling me your birth date. HANISIAN: My birth date is 1900, January 1st. LEVINE: The first day of the first month of the first year. HANISIAN: Of January, of the first year, 1900. So I have no trouble to say my age. I go by the years. 1992, now, that's why I'm ninety-two years old. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Now, where were you born? HANISIAN: I was born in Mosabagh. LEVINE: Now, when you say words like Mosabagh, can you spell them for me, because I have trouble when I get back? HANISIAN: M-O-S-A, Mosa, B-A-G-H. Mosabagh. LEVINE: Okay. HANISIAN: That way we spell it, I believe. LEVINE: Okay. And is Mosabagh in Syria? HANISIAN: It was in Syria when I came. Now under the Turkish government now, controlled the Turkish government now. It was under the Turks before, 19, uh, 1915 the war, the French took it over and gave it to the Syria. Syria, we were there till 19, uh, 1949. Then French gave it to the, back to the Turks again. That's what happened. Now Turkey again. LEVINE: Uh-huh. Okay. Well, do you remember Mosabagh? Do you remember the town as it was before you left it? HANISIAN: Yeah. I remember it. We were all so close together. We were five villages, and all the people, they're very close together. So everybody knows everybody in our village, you know. LEVINE: And what did people do there? What, how did people make a living? HANISIAN: Well, it was very hard to make a living. Whoever had a little farm, like, you know, what they can plant on the farm, they survive with that. Some people have a trade like weaving, like comb-making, comb-making, and what, the shoemakers, tailors. And the rest is just like plain workers. LEVINE: What about your father? What did he do? HANISIAN: He worked agriculture. He was working in a farm, and we weren't so rich. We were poor. Just about to have our living by working hard. Farm work, you know, that's seven days' work, and you have to work. No laziness down there. You have to work to eat. Otherwise, too bad. You'll be hungry. LEVINE: Now, did your father work on someone else's farm? HANISIAN: No, we had our own, but very small. Hardly to make a living out of it, very small. LEVINE: What was your father's name? HANISIAN: Uh, Vania. V-A-N-I-A. They call him Vania. That must be a John before they change it to Vania, you know. They call him Vania. LEVINE: And your mother? What was her name? HANISIAN: My mother's name is Hartun, Hartun. So, she was very, very nice mother, believe me. And she died when she was a hundred and something years old. LEVINE: And what was your mother's maiden name? Do you remember that? HANISIAN: Koshian. LEVINE: Can you spell it? HANISIAN: K-O-S-H-I-A-N. Koshian. LEVINE: Now, did your mother work at all, or was she at home? Did your mother work? HANISIAN: No, nobody. Yeah, worked on a farm, I mean. LEVINE: On the farm. HANISIAN: They milked the cows. Whatever's necessary to do. They worked on a farm, in other words. They had no factory to work in a factory. They did the home work, like washing and cooking and milking, you know. Whatever is necessary to do. LEVINE: I see. So you had some livestock and then you grew vegetables? HANISIAN: Yes. We grew vegetables, whatever we can, and we had fruit trees. So hardly buy a meat, like. We are more like vegetarians, without meat and stuff. Every once in a while we had milk, but everybody live with the farm productive stuff, you know, vegetarian. I don't know what you call them. LEVINE: Do you remember any of the foods that your mother prepared when you were young? What kind of dishes do you remember from your childhood? HANISIAN: ( he laughs ) Sarma, dorma. That's all Oriental. Sarma, dorma, beans and cucumbers and squash and black, uh, black peppers, peppers. All those things. I mean, salad things, you know. LEVINE: When you think, when you think back to your childhood, to your boyhood, what are the things that you think about? HANISIAN: When I'm a child, I know nothing. I know nothing. Because we didn't go out the villages to see something. When my father was born, I was born, whatever my father do, they're learning the same thing, same, too. When you are thirteen, twelve, thirteen, you start helping your father. And we had a school, a school in there. There was kids, now, what are you going to do? We have to go in a school, so they sent us in a school. So the father, mother, nobody's home. Everybody in the farm, working the farm. Young kids, what they're going to do? Like it or not, they have to go to school. So that was my. I don't see much. I mean, what I see? I live the country life. (?) country life. We had no electric, of course. We had no bath. Everybody used to sleep in one room, one big room. Daddy, Mommy here, the youngest one there, the brother, older, older, seven, eight families, in the same room. They ate the same table, they enjoyed together, they worked together. They were very, very nice time they have together, because they love each other. They cared each other. Big ones take care of the smallest, you know. So I grew up that way. LEVINE: Where did you fit in in the family with your brothers and sisters? Were you in the middle, or were you the youngest? HANISIAN: I was the last one. LEVINE: You were the baby? HANISIAN: I was the last one. My mother was, I told my daughter now, fifty-five years of age when she got me. She must be a strong lady! ( they laugh ) They are strong that way. LEVINE: Yeah! Well, how many brothers and sisters did you have? HANISIAN: I had, well, four brothers and one sister in the family. Father, mother, seven people. LEVINE: And was, did you live in a house? HANISIAN: Yeah, the same house. LEVINE: A little house, just your family? HANISIAN: Yeah. The house belonged to us. You know, we built it, it belonged to us. So everybody lived the same, the same house, same room, you know. If you have a little cows or goats or something, a little room for them, and the other for us. We shared the same thing. ( he laughs ) LEVINE: So was it, your house was then one room, and then a separate section for the animals. HANISIAN: Yes. LEVINE: Uh-huh. HANISIAN: Yes. Two rooms, like, you know, two big rooms. One belonged to animals, one belonged to us. ( he laughs ) LEVINE: And what was it made out of? What kind of . . . HANISIAN: House? LEVINE: Yeah. HANISIAN: All stone down there. We had plenty of stone, so it was stone. You know, it was a stone-built home. LEVINE: Can you describe it at all so I can picture it? HANISIAN: The house, you mean? LEVINE: Yeah. HANISIAN: A four-wall house. Very seldom you see two . . . LEVINE: Stories. HANISIAN: Stories, very seldom. All one four-room house. And they covered the top with this (?), I don't know what you call them, which the rain won't go in. That's it, I mean, the plain. No bed. Everybody, as I said, everybody work on the floor. LEVINE: How about cooking? How did your mother cook? HANISIAN: How the mother cook? The same way you cook. We eat the same, we have no special place, except the table in there. A big pot we have in the middle, everybody take his own spoon. ( he laughs ) Hey, eat until it's finished. It's finished, that's all. You're still hungry there? Too bad. ( he laughs ) That's finished, and you have to wait until tomorrow. Have to prepare something again. LEVINE: What did your mother cook on? What kind of stove did she have. HANISIAN: Wood. LEVINE: Oh, it was a fire. HANISIAN: Yeah, a fire. LEVINE: On the stove? HANISIAN: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Because we had a lot of wood. Everybody goes the mountains to prepare the wood for the fire and for their use, whatever it is. So wood, we used wood. LEVINE: And what did you do for fun when you were young? What did you do for enjoyment for amusement? HANISIAN: What the young kids do. Run here, run there, sometimes we go hunting, you know, the hunting. And the villagers, they had the habit, the hunting habit. Every morning they used to go hunting the little birdies, whatever the thing. The wintertime have a special birdies, springtime and autumn, you know, all the time, all the seasons, they bring their own kind of birdies. So the people started hunting, then half the food come from that hunting birdies. So that's what I said, very hungry, they buy the meat, because they're all nice meat, you know, meat and everything. So they got the big onions, they chopped the onions, they chopped those little birdies in there, two together, hey, that's good. ( he laughs ) LEVINE: Let's see. How about religion? Was your family religious? HANISIAN: What? LEVINE: Was your family a religious family? HANISIAN: Of course, yes. Every Sunday, every Sunday we have to go to church. Even in the nighttime, they had it twice, like, in morning and night. When we heard ringing, we got nothing to do, we have to go to church. We have to go to church. Very religious people. Very religious people. They believe in the God. And God . . . LEVINE: What church was it that you went to? HANISIAN: Uh, what will come, ( Armenian ). The Church, Apostolic, Apostolic Church, Apostolic Church. We have a lot of churches. You ever meet the Armenian people in here? LEVINE: Not very many, no. HANISIAN: We have a big church down at Ridgefield. We have a church down in New York and, you know. Armenians are very religious people. LEVINE: Tell me more about your mother. Tell me what you remember of your mother, what she was like, when you were a little boy. HANISIAN: My mother was very, as I say, a very, very sweet woman. She never say bad things. Always says, "Sonny." Always says, you know, nobody hear nothing from her mouth bad words. She tried to help everybody. She tried to help our neighbors. Everybody, they used to like her. She likes them, you know. So everybody used to say, "Mom," and "Mom, Mom." Sometimes they come there to ask advice from here. "What can I do?" You know, such a thing for the woman thing, like she tried to help them all. She was a very, very nice woman, always smiling. LEVINE: And how about your father? What was he like? HANISIAN: Well, my father was a nice man, too. ( he laughs ) How the fathers are? All fathers are good, right, like the mommies? He was all right. He does his share of work. He does his share of work. He gave the, you know, he take care of the boys and all, he tell them what to do. He's the head of the family, right? And everybody ask him what to do. He asks them what to do. So he was very, very close with the children. The children were very, very close with the father and mother, and we used to live that kind of life. LEVINE: Do you remember any things that your father taught you? HANISIAN: My father said, all the time says, "Sonny, first you have to learn how to read and write." He says, "Because I don't know how to read and write. My father had no chance to send me to school." He says, "I don't care what you're going to do, but you've got to learn how to read and write. You don't have to be a priest, and you don't have to be a teacher, but just, you know, to, you can write a letter at least. Suppose your brother's not here, you want to send a letter. I don't have to call from outsiders to send my son letters. I want you to do that." So I took his advice. I learned as much as I can. At least I could write letters, when my brother was no more in the country, they were out to the South America, they went South America, they run away from the Turks, you know, because they were going to, they were going to take them in the Army. My oldest brother was in the Army anyway. He served them four years, and they would try them for the war, to work in the war, and they escaped, let them go in a war. And because they have no guns. When they take them as a soldier, they don't give them no guns, they don't give them no guns. They give them the works, works, dirty works. The Army have a lot of dirty works, right? They used to do that. Nobody, nobody gave them the trust Armenians to have a gun. The Turks, that way. LEVINE: You mean they gave guns to other people in the Army? HANISIAN: Yes. LEVINE: But to the Armenians, they gave them the dirty job. HANISIAN: They didn't trust the Armenians. They didn't trust the Armenians. LEVINE: So your brothers ran away? HANISIAN: My brother ran away, they declared the war in 1911. My brother, with the Bulgaria, the Turks declared war with the Bulgaria in 1911. So my brother says, "They tell us be ready tomorrow, we're going to go war." Then him and my cousin, another boy, same village, said, "You're not going to fight with the Bulgarian, for what? We run away." So they did. When they did run away, now we're going. In the daytime, they can keep up their way to come back home. In the nighttime they used to travel. Daytime, they used to hide. It took them two months, they come, they reach us. It took them two months, they come to reach us. By the same time the Turks send a, send a, some police. They're looking for it. They know where they come from. You know, they're looking for them. Then my brother says, "I wish I could see my son." He says, "Four years I don't see them," he says. But he came, my brother came separately, him and his friends, separately. He only stayed for a couple, a couple of weeks, because he can't be around. So I said, they said he is running away, he has to come here. He said, "I wish I'd see him," he said, "once." When are you going to see him? So they find a way, my brother find a way, and run away and get the ship and go to the South America which my other two brothers were there already from before. So that way . . . LEVINE: I see. So then there were, what, there was one brother left, and your sister and you? HANISIAN: My sister and me, father and mother left home. LEVINE: Oh. All your brothers, then, were in South America? HANISIAN: Three brothers, but out to South America. Buenos Aires, Argentina. Argentina, Buenos Aires. They stayed there for whole 1915. They went there '11, 1911, '12. They stayed there till '15, and then 1915 they came from there to this country. LEVINE: Oh. Uh-huh. HANISIAN: From there to here. This country. Then when I came 1920 they were here, up in Connecticut, New Britain, Connecticut. So when I came I can get their addresses. LEVINE: Now, did you, were you writing to them when they were in South America? HANISIAN: Yes, yeah. LEVINE: And when they came to here? HANISIAN: Yes, we used to write to them. And we used to give them the news, the news down there, now, they send it back. They'd try to help us a little bit now because, as I said, we were a poor family. They're earning, whatever they're earning there, and they used to send us, so we were happy. At least my mother and my father was happy because, you know how it is, you have no money, you're nobody. Yeah, so we like a little time. LEVINE: Can you remember, like, what they wrote to you about South America, or about this country, when you were still here? HANISIAN: Well, in the war time, we didn't hear from them, wartime, you know wartime? We didn't hear from them. And 1915 we weren't (?) no money in the village. You know, before (?). You haven't heard that story? LEVINE: You tell me. HANISIAN: See, when the Turks started genocide of the Armenians, genocide, which you must have heard, a million-and-a-half Armenians they killed, and they take them from their villages and all, all, they put them on some desert. On the way they died, and they killed them, and a million-and-a-half, they got killed. So when they come to our villages, they said, "You're going to go, too, now, in two days' times for you, everybody has to leave the house, going to go away." He said, "For what?" He says, "We're very dangerous around here because we have the war with the French, with the England and all." He says, "We don't want you to hurt. That's why we have to take them out." By then, our people, they heard what's happening the other villages, you know, they killed and all. And they make a meeting. They says, "We're going to die, let us die bravely." We have to go down there on the road, and they're going to kill you and they're going to insult you. You know how it is." Then they said, "No. We got up the mountain, we fight. We die with bravery." So that's decided, they're dying that way, let us die this way. So they decide, everybody start to go up the mountain. When they go up the mountain nobody goes, you know, they come some policemen, some soldiers to take the people, there's no more people down there. So they organized, they organized. They sent us about two hundred soldiers, they bring us back from the mountain. We're all already on the mountain. Then we start the fighting now. We are not going to go. So before forty days in there, now, with hunting guns, we had no, we had a few regular guns we had, only all the hunting guns. You know, hunting guns with the powders, you have to build it up. And rain in there, fog in there. You know, when the fog remains, there's one, you can't use the guns, because it gets damp, you know. So we have that troubles. So finally we fought, we fought. Because we know the places, the Turks, they come, two thousand, three thousand Turks with the cannons and everything. They can't hurt us much because there's all big rocks down there. We are back to the rocks, and they look for you. Put on the back of the rock, put on here, just like the bird, you know, all the good hunters. Just like the bird, they kill them. All the men wanted to kill them. So that way we last forty days. Now what? After forty days we have no more food, we have no more ammunition, you know. Everything is gone. Now figure out the Mediterranean Sea is not long from us, Mediterranean Sea. Right, the mountain, you got the mountain down in Mediterranean Sea. You figure out maybe, maybe, if God's willing, some ships from England or France or something, they're guarding around there. They always used to come every once in a while, and says they prepared a big red cross. They, we sent the boys down there, down the hill, they put that red cross down there, and written was there, "We are fighting with your enemy." Because they declare war with the Turks at that time. And it says, "Please send some ammunition, some food. We're going to try, we're going to try fighting." So we wait, we wait. Finally one ship passed by. It passed by, and the people, maybe they can't see this flag in some way. They start to fire, mountain fire. So all that smoke and everything, so they take the attention, you know, what's going on. Luckily, luckily one Armenian guy was in that ship, Armenian guy. Not the captain, less than captain, whatever you call, he was serving for the French Army. Then he says, "Captain, some smoking in there." So the captain look and he says, "I see some flag in there." You know. So the ships, everybody waiting for another ship to start turning like this, and the people started crying and hollering, you know, they're going to get saved. So finally they send a little boat from that battleship. They send a boat. The boys were waiting for them. So one of two boys, they took one of two boys, they said the story, you know, they said to them. And then they believe in us, of course they believe in us. Then start to bomb, one bomb the trenches. The battleship started to bomb the trenches, the village. So they're scared, the Turks are scared. They stopped their fighting. And then we said, "We can't help you in here now. We can't give you ammunition to fight, you know. We are in the war, too. But we're going to try to save you someway, somehow. Now we have to wait at least a week to find, to find, you know, from the headquarters whether we can. So when we come back we let you know everything." So we wait five days. We wait five days, then the same ship come back again and said, "We're going to save you. Be ready. We're going to save you tomorrow. You start coming down from the mountain up the Mediterranean Sea, right back there, about one hour you have to go way down." So they come with the five battleships now following, they come with five battleships. All the people, you know, they were dying, now all of a sudden they were saved, so everybody was happy, everybody goes to the ship. They come and save them. And the boys, fighting boys, still they were in the trenches, because they never know what's going to happy. They were ready less, the less people was them to go in the ships. So that way they brought us to Port Said, in Egypt, Port Said, they have to brought us somewhere, where? That was the desert down there. But the Suez Channel. You know where is the Suez Channel? So they put tents under that hot weather, they put the tents, put all the people down there. Two tanks guard, everybody was safe, everybody was happy. Even thought they're not used to that life, hot, too hot. You know, they're not used to hot weather. In our country was nice, all green and everything. So we, that way we got saved. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO LEVINE: Now, how old were you when this happened? HANISIAN: I was fifteen years old. LEVINE: Fifteen. And then how long did you stay in Egypt? HANISIAN: We used to appeal, fifteen days they picked us up. And the same battleship that took us back after the war stopped now under the French control, come back again to the French control in our places. So the same ships, they took us back to our villages. That was good, I mean, it was good. So everybody was happier. So it was less, 19, uh, 1919, I think, they start the people going now, they start the people going. So I stayed there only one year. Then I decide, "What I'm going to do now? I have no trade, you know. I have no trade, I have no education. What I'm going to do in here?" We had nothing of farms in here. I figure out I'm going to try to get out from this country. So I wrote a letter to my brothers, and my brother's wife was with us, too. He was married, you know, he had a son. They send us the money, so I took my brother's wife and kid. Together we came to this country. 1920. LEVINE: And what about your mother and father and sister? HANISIAN: They stayed there. They stayed there, and we was figuring something after, we were going to bring them after we were up there, or everything was settled down, maybe my brother was not married yet. He was about thirty-eight years old, not married yet. He was about thirty-eight years old, not married yet, because he was down there. Maybe sent him by mom and dad and we'll see what we're going to do. So he did that way. I came this country. After three months he went my mom and dad. LEVINE: And they were still in Egypt then? HANISIAN: No, no. LEVINE: They had come back. HANISIAN: They were in the old country, we came back in the old country again. LEVINE: So did you ever go back to your village? HANISIAN: After I came, yes. 1961 I went. LEVINE: Oh. HANISIAN: 1961, I'm going to go again. I went with another friend. I went to Anger. Because, you know, there was no people no more, Mosabagh. 1939 the Turks, the French government gave them back to that Sanja, Alexandria Sanja, they call him, go back to the Turks. It was belonged to them anyway. Then the other people again, five thousand people, again, they have to go out. And they threw them out. So now where they're going to go? And they went all to Lebanon. They find them a place down there. Five thousand people now. They bring them in Anger. So 1939, before second World War started. So all the people, a lot of people wasn't there, I wasn't there. My father and mother and sister were there then. My brother, as I said, married down there. So 1961 I says, "I'm going to see Mom and Dad once, you know, my sisters and all." So I went, 1961. They were grown then, you know. So I went to see. Then I says, "As far as I'm here now, I'm going to go back again to see my villages, my home, my places, the mountain." I did, we did. We took the picture and everything, movies down there. And all the Turk refugees was there, Turk refugees were there. So first I went to house which I born, the first thing there. There was a lady, there was a lady in there, she says, "Who's you?" In Turkish language, talked Turk, you know, Turkish language, I understand a little bit Turkish language. "Who are you?" I says, "Who are you?" I says, "This my house." Then I tried to explain her I born here and what happening. Then she started to cry. She said, "Sonny," she said, "we have the same trouble." She said, "We was in Bulgaria. Over, the Bulgarians said they chase us out, the half a million Turks. So when we were there, no more, you know, they took us out, they bring all the people, refugee people, in our villages down there." So she says, "It's my house." "Well," she says, "it's not your house." It was my house. I go around. I see no more trees. The cut all the trees, fruit trees. I said, "You cut the fruit trees, why?" "To burn the, make a fire." "We used to go up the mountain to bring that wood instead of cutting the fruit trees. Now what are we going to eat?" So she started to cry, she says, "My husband is not home yet. When he come back tonight, please come down." She says, "You know, see my husband, too." I says, "No, that's enough. I saw." So I forget then, go back. So next day I went to, up to Mosabagh. Mosabagh is too steep hill. You have to walk five hours before you get on the top. LEVINE: Is that the hill that the battle was on? HANISIAN: Yeah, yeah. So we know all the places where we battled, we fought. We know by name, by rocks and all. Another two boys I took with me from there now, from Mosabagh. He says, "I'm going to go up the mountain." He says, "Oh, man, that's foolish to go up there." He says, "We are so many years in here now, we've never been there." I says, "I want to go to see it. I mean, you don't want to come, I go alone." So finally they come with us, and we go up the place that we fought, and there was a statue. We make the statue down there. They destroyed the statues down there, and we used to sleep in, you know, our tents, what it was. I stayed there, and there was a spring water. We went on the spring water, we drink that water, stood there half an hour, whatever it is, in the nighttime. Nighttime now, not daytime. Nighttime we come back again. Twelve o'clock we start in the morning, back again. So I was very happy to saw again, once more, once more my villages which I was born into, and my people which I've never seen them long time. Too bad I don't see my father. Too bad I don't see my mother. They were dead already. Only I saw my sisters. And then I stayed there about three months. You know, Anger now. All the people was happy down there, and everybody had apple groves, they make apple groves, they make a nice living. They used to live better than in our country. They had the nicest schooling down there, so everybody was happy. So I stayed there three months and come back, back home, and I'm here now. LEVINE: What did it feel like to be back there, to see your village and see . . . HANISIAN: Believe me, I don't know what to say. I feel better to see, once more I'm going to see my birth place. I had that in my mind in my heart. So I'm going to, I don't care what happened, I'm going to. I did, and I'm very satisfied. At least I saw my cousins and all, which I don't see them too many years, forty years, forty-five years. Yeah. So that's it. LEVINE: Well, now, what was the circumstance under which you came to this country? How did it, how did you arrange that? HANISIAN: We had a little boat, the little boat on the Mediterranean, Mosabagh, there's the Mediterranean, the Mediterranean Sea, right? The boats were down there, the boat to travel, travel on the boat to the Alexandrette. It's a nice day, they could take about five, six hours. LEVINE: Is this Alexandria, Egypt? HANISIAN: Alexandrette. LEVINE: Oh, Alexandrette. HANISIAN: Alexandrette, by Mosabagh, in Turkey. So we get that little boat, you know, a boat, and it took us three days because there's no wind. How are they going to go, you know. It took us about three days until we got Alexandrette. Alexandrette, we stayed there a week, a couple of weeks. We took a ship. We went to Ismael, Ismael. You know where it is? Ismael. So we used to bring Ismael for a month, waiting for a ship come United States. So they didn't come a ship from Ismael. So what we do, we go, we took the ship to go to Greece, in Greece. We went to Greece, we wait until another week, another week too, before the ship ready to come in this country. We took that ship. The name was Pannonia, if I remember. So it took us twenty-one days from Egypt, from the Greece to Ellis Island, twenty-one days. LEVINE: What was the voyage like? HANISIAN: What? LEVINE: The voyage. HANISIAN: The voyage was bad. I couldn't take the, I was sick, sick in the first day, seasick. I couldn't eat, I couldn't, nothing. I was miserable. And the ship was, I don't know, not the passenger ship. At that time ships you're talking about. LEVINE: Were you down in the bottom? HANISIAN: The bottom! And where you're going to sleep now? One, one laying here, one here, five, six. You know, laying down there, and you have to sleep like that. Somebody, woman, somebody, and dirty. Louse all around and, oh, miserable. So it was bad. When I came in Ellis Island, which I never see, lights and all, at nighttime, you see the New York lights and everything. And, my God, I says, we were living in Hell. Now, we're living in here now. What it is now? It's Heaven now. From Hell we get out, thanks God. You took us from Hell, you bring us to the Heaven. So we was so happy. We never see light like that and all, you know, all opened, closed lights, and everything. I never seen light in my life, you know. All electricity, all nothing. So I was very happy. I stayed there about a week, I think, before I, I had no more money. My money is all gone. I send again to my brother. I says, "Hey, I'm here now already. I have no money now." They send us some money. LEVINE: Now, who were you with when you came on the ship? HANISIAN: With my friend, my friend, village friend, you know. We came together. He went to Philadelphia, I went to Connecticut. LEVINE: So you, so did your brother know you were coming? HANISIAN: Yes. LEVINE: But he didn't know when. He didn't know when you would come, exactly. HANISIAN: No. When I took a ship I wrote them. I wrote them, I says we take this ship, and I know how many days it would take us, when the ship we're going to take come. They find out from agents, I guess, you know, so they know, they know coming. LEVINE: So then when you got to Ellis Island, why did you have to stay there for one week? HANISIAN: You know, first they have to examine the people down there in the first, your eyes and whatever it is, you know, examining there. But all the refugees in commerce, they have to stay there to exam. They examined them. And somebody may come down there, they pick up their peoples. Somebody, they know the language, whatever it is. They can take care of themselves. They go out, they have money and everything. But we had no money. My friend had no money, too. So what I'm going to do? I can't speak English a word. Now what? Now what are we going to do? So I sent them letters again. They send me, and the people down there, they gave, they gave us, one fellow said, "Take these boys to the train." I don't know where to go, from Ellis Island. One boy from there, he took us to New York, put us in the train, the train goes to the Connecticut, which my brother was in there. So that way I reach my brothers. LEVINE: Uh-huh. And what was it like to see your brother again? HANISIAN: Oh, I was, I told you I was so happy I started to cry. You know how it is. I started to cry. Too much feeling in you. And thanks God, thanks God. You understand, thank God I am here now, you know. We were happy, then, together. I live my brother. LEVINE: Well, before we talk about getting settled in this country, is there anything more you remember about Ellis Island when you were there for that week? HANISIAN: Before, before I came this country? LEVINE: Yes. No, when you first came, when you were at Ellis Island, before you met up with your brother. HANISIAN: Yeah. Uh, I remember a big hall in Ellis Island, you know, it's a big hall in there. Now, we went, how many months ago we went there? ( voice off mike ) Four or five months ago? They renewed it now, my God. When we were there it was big hall, maybe a couple of rooms were upstairs or something. That's it. And thousands of people were there, and there's no bed, nothing. Of course, you have to get a blanket on the floor. You have to, you know, sleep on the floor. And they take care of us good. At night time they show us movies, movies, night time. And day time they just go feed some sandwiches. I mean, they take care of us good. If you're sick the doctor's down there. So they take care of us good. LEVINE: Okay. Do you remember the Statue of Liberty? Do you remember seeing the Statue when you first came into the Harbor? HANISIAN: Yeah, and they told us, "That's the Statue of Liberty." Of course. We don't know before. I had no idea before. So we know now. Now we know. Then we salute them, and we pray them. It was very, very happy. LEVINE: Okay. Now, when you first got to the United States, when you first went on the train to go to Connecticut. HANISIAN: Yeah. LEVINE: Well, do you remember things about this country that struck you as different from anything you'd seen before? HANISIAN: My God, I remember, I never seen the trains before, I never seen the planes before. We never see nothing before. But when I see everything, trains and the people, you know, factories, everybody happy, dressed up, they're working, they're singing, they're eating. I said, "This is Heaven! This is Heaven!" Because I come from the Hell, so this is the Heaven, this is the Heaven. You know, I had that feeling now. LEVINE: And how was it learning English. How did you learn English then? HANISIAN: Well, little by little, little by little. Three months I went to night school, three months in night school, three months. Then my brother get me a job, when he get me a job I couldn't go to school no more. I had to work ten hours and all. So that's it now. Little by little every day. I learned a little bit. Not much, but I helped myself a little bit. LEVINE: So what was the night school like? Were there people from all different countries in your class? HANISIAN: Yes, yes, yes. Because nobody knows English, you know. And I used to know a little bit French. In school, in first grade in the school, one year they give French. Nobody know English there, all French. All the countries, Egypt and the French was the first, no English. English come after. So I understood a little French. I could explain myself, like, you know. Just broken, just like now, me, I talk to you. So my teacher there, she knows how to speak French. Then, you know, I used to tell them, "What is the word of this?" She used to like me, I guess. She gave me the name, this one. She helped me a lot. She helped me a lot. Just because, you know, she understand French. I understand a little French. So, between me and her, little by little, little by little, it was all right. LEVINE: And what kind of job did you start out with? HANISIAN: It was, New Britain was the iron factories, all the iron factories, iron. All iron factories was New Britain. Like New Jersey, the Patterson was silk. Silk (?) before. Now, that was the iron city ( he laughs ) they used to call them. You know, all the iron things. I worked there about four years. Four years, then they teach me, my cousin was in the silk, weaving, silk weaving business. He said, "It's too dirty in those iron factories." He said, "Why don't you come down? I'll teach you how to weave. At least you have to put the tie and you have to be clean. You play with the silk, you know." Then I said, "Okay." ( he laughs ) I left that job. I learned my weaving. When I learned my weaving I came here, Patterson. As I say, Patterson was the silk city. So I make my living from the weaving, in other words. That was my trade, in other words. I make a trade out of it. LEVINE: I see. So that's what you stuck with, the weaving trade. HANISIAN: Yes. LEVINE: And then when did you meet your wife? What were the circumstances? HANISIAN: My wife, we almost came together but different ways. They come in a French line. We come from another line. And I go, my wife, in old country. We were kind of cousins, you know, part cousin, like. We used to go, they used to come my house and we used to go their house. You know, we knew each other, same village, some cousin. So they came the same place, so we started again going back and forth. So finally we married. ( he laughs ) What can I say? LEVINE: What was your wife's name? HANISIAN: Sarah. My name . . . LEVINE: And her maiden name? HANISIAN: Serekian, Serekian. LEVINE: S-E . . . HANISIAN: S-E-R-E-K-I-A-N. Serekian. LEVINE: And how many children did you have? HANISIAN: I had five children. Three is living and two is dead. One boy and one daughter we lost, nine, they were nine months old when they died. They took pneumonia or something. They couldn't help them, so they die, both of them, they die. LEVINE: And the names of your children, your children who didn't die? HANISIAN: That died, John and Mary. LEVINE: And how about the other children, the children that lived? HANISIAN: Virginia, Mary and Neshtah, my son, only son. Which he died six years ago, six years. ATANIAN: Four. HANISIAN: Four years ago? Yeah, four years ago he died. LEVINE: Neshtah? HANISIAN: Neshtah, yeah. LEVINE: How do you spell that? HANISIAN: N-E-S-H-T-A-H. Neshtah. LEVINE: Now, do you have grandchildren? HANISIAN: I have nine grandchildren and two great-grandchildren. LEVINE: Wow. HANISIAN: I was happy for them all. LEVINE: Now, I asked you before what you learned from your father. Can you think of anything your mother tried to teach you or wanted you to know about life or about yourself? HANISIAN: Try to help as much as you can, try to help your friends, the other people. Try to be a nice boy. Try to be a church boy, you know. Don't get, mix with the bad boys. Bad boys is bad boys. You know, those kind of, what else can a mother say? ( he coughs ) LEVINE: Now, did your mother ever come, did your mother ever come to this country? HANISIAN: No. LEVINE: No. HANISIAN: ( he coughs ) She went Beirut. She died in Beirut when everybody out again the Mosabagh, they gave again back to the Turks. All the people, six thousand people, our people, they all come back again to Busaid. ( he coughs ) Not Port Said. I mean, uh, Lebanon, Beirut, Beirut. My mother died in Beirut. 1945, I think, which my brother and my sister was there, too. They died there. LEVINE: Well, when you think over your life, when you think about the village where you started out and then going to Egypt and then coming here, what do you, what do you think when you think back over your long and interesting life? HANISIAN: Egypt was too hot, you know, too hot. And what can I say? The life was good in Mosabagh, as a life. But we are poor, as I said. That's number two. And we had no regular school down there. Regular teachers, we had no regular teachers. Take us a couple of years before we get the A-B-C-D's. You know, old country. LEVINE: What would you do? What was the school like? Was it a real school, or you just met with someone, or . . . HANISIAN: Yep. When we went to Port Said, right away they establish a school down there. Red Cross, Armenian Red Cross and with the other helps, with the other's helps, they establish a school down there, about five hundred boys and girls was in the schooling. LEVINE: Was that, was that the first school you went to? HANISIAN: Yeah. We learned down there, hardly I know A-B-C-D's in old country. When I came down there we had the regular teachers, you know. Then in fourth, four years they teach us, which I finished the fifth grade in that school. Fifth grade is not bad. Not so good, but not so bad. LEVINE: Well, now, how many years were you there in Port Said? HANISIAN: I told you, about four-and-a-half years. LEVINE: Four-and-a-half. Uh-huh. So you started in the first grade. HANISIAN: Yeah. LEVINE: And you . . . HANISIAN: Ended the fifth grade, that's it. No more schooling after that. So then I built myself up and I came here, and I went to the club and papers and all, you know. So I bring myself up a little bit. I can read Armenian good. Not bad, but it's all right now. LEVINE: Uh-huh. So your life, your life in the village was good, but you were poor. HANISIAN: Poor. LEVINE: And in Port Said it was . . . HANISIAN: Too hot. LEVINE: Hot. HANISIAN: But education way is good because you get regular teachers down there, you know. If you hadn't lived in, if you never been in my place before, you'll like the Egypt. But whoever lived in my place before, a different life altogether. All greens, all flowers, all nature way, you live with the nature way, in other words. You don't know with the other things, nature way. You live nature way. That's what you show that you grow. That's what you see. That's your own life. LEVINE: So then when yo came to America, then what? How would you talk about your life since you came here? HANISIAN: Yes. When I came here everything was up-to-date here. By God, you got nice room, you got your own bath. You got gas to heat, you got the other things, and what can I tell you. You got to work. If you're not lazy, you work. You make a living, and independence, you don't have to worry no more the Turks coming, Turks coming, going to kill us, going to kill us. We always, they had that treaty in our heart down there, you know. So you feel independent. You feel real, United States people, yeah. So I felt myself as a United States, real, democratic way people. So of course I be happy. I'm happy now, too. And, thanks God, my children are around me now, and I am old and enjoy my old life now. What I do? I do nothing now. I just take care of myself, my health, thanks God. My health is not so bad yet. LEVINE: That's great. Are there any ways that you, that you had from, Armenian ways that you learned growing up that you still hold on to? HANISIAN: Yes. When, I said when I come in here I belong to the society, Armenian Rule and (?) Society, which we always fighting for the independence. Independence, independence, which we had, that independence, 1918. Then the Bolsheviks come and grab from us. Now thanks God, again now we have that independence back again after the Bolsheviks fell. We always, always fighting against the Bolsheviks, against the Bolsheviks. So I belonged to the clubs, Armenian clubs. And I learn a lot. We had our meetings and all, little by little, little by little, you know. You learn something. Every day I learn something. We had the meetings, and they used to send me as a delegate to the meetings, and come back again and, you know, I feel myself good American and good Armenian, I find myself. Good Armenian and good American. And I live a nice life, a clean life, working hard. We never begged. We always working hard. We make ten dollars, we spend ten dollars. We got no ten dollars, we don't spend nothing, you know. So we are all right, thanks God I'm all right right now. LEVINE: Okay. END OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE ONE, TAPE TWO ATANIAN: You know what I would think would be very interesting for Janet was remember when you and your friends had gone into town and your friends were all killed and you had gone to the priest. Your cousin was a priest. Do you remember that story? I think Janet would be very interested in that, how your life was spared and all your friends were killed by the Turks? HANISIAN: Oh, I know it's . . . LEVINE: Well, when . . . HANISIAN: Before, see, when we just came back to the Mosabagh this happened again. I saw three wars, now, in my life, now. First war, second war and the little war before I came United States. ( he clears his throat ) My brothers send us a little money, check, of course. And my father said, "Son, take the check, go to the city." The city is, you have to walk five, six hours before you get to the marketplace. That city, marketplace. Whatever you need, you know, you get from there. You want to sell something, you sell it there. You want to buy something, you buy it there, you know. So we went, we went with seven, eight, not the boys. We went that city to buy something, and next day whatever we buy for home, we're going to bring it. Then what happened? They put there again to genocide, the Christians, in that city now. All the Turks, right? So I went with the group. I cashed my check. Then we went to restaurant. We ate something. Then we're going to find some place to sleep. Then what happened? When I was walking my cousin who saw me, I was walking with the boys, he said, "Hey, man, what you doing here?" I says, "I came to buy something." He say, "What you going to do?" I says, "We're going to go sleep someplace. I don't know where." "Well," he says, "you are not going to go sleep someplace else because I got the room." He says, he was secretary of the Bishop, Armenian Bishop down there. He was secretary. He says, "I'm not going to be in my place tonight." He says, "I'll go up there, I'll take you up there." He says, "I'll introduce you with the Bishop. You'll stay in my room, until tomorrow you'll meet them back again." Then the same time the Bishop, you know, the Bishop says, "Son," he says, "did you hear something?" I said, "What I'm hearing?" I said, "No, I just came." He said, "They're preparing to kill the Christians again." I says, "How do you know those things?" "It's a lot of rumors," he says. Finally, he was all alone, an old man, he was about seventy, seventy-five years old. Then when he said that, then he said, "Bishop," I says, "you have any guns in here, and anything to protect?" He says, "Son, we have nothing in here. We have no food, we have nothing. It's just established, just established that position down there." And he said, "Only the gun had that your cousin took it, and run away." And he says, "Well, see what happens." Then four o'clock in the morning I started to hear the boom-boom-boom-boom, guns noise. "What the hell is this now?" Boom-boom-boom. Four, five o'clock more, six o'clock more. Then it started, the people rushing, hollering and swearing to the Christians they'll start killing. Just like (?) again. So he say, "Didn't I tell you what's going to happen?" I say, "What do we going to do now? You tell me." He says, "That's all the door. Let us make all the tables and everything in here, back the door so they can't come." ( he laughs ) He said, "If they come they're going to break the damn road and come back." Finally we stood there, when we stood there the people starting shooting them up, killing whoever they see. They know it's Christians. Armenian or Greek, or whatever it is, they kill them. (?) looking from the windows, second floor windows. I saw two men with the rope, they tried with the rope, "Boom-boom boom-boom." They poke them. I says, "Bishop, come here." I says, "You see those two people?" I says, "That's my friend. I was with them last night." Yeah. "Yeah?" I say, "Yeah." So he says, "It's a good thing you wasn't with them." I says, what would happen, what you're going to do. So three, they killed the three of the boys, with that. Another one, they shoot him, they warned him, he throw himself in the river there. He hide himself in river two, three days with the wounded. Then when the French soldiers come out, then, you know, he come out. So we lost six Armenian boys that time in there. So just luckily I wasn't with them. When they hear those guns, you know, shooting guns, they try to run and cross that bridge to come back again to villages, to Mosabagh. But the villages was occupied with soldiers, Turks, soldiers. Then whoever they see they shoot. So we stayed there three or four days. Then he said, "Son, there's Armenians living down there." He says, "If there's a way you can go up there, knock the doors hardly to tell them, "Hey, Bishop is downs there, he needs help. He has no food, nothing, no gun. He needs help." So I says, "I'll do it." Opened the door, that's all the, surrounded the people down there. All the corner, the houses was guarding. When I went down there I looked, and then the corner was going to pass right away. He saw me, son of a gun, he shoot. He shoot three, four guns. He says, "Ah, boys, it's too bad." He said, "Boys gone, bishop, you don't hear that." Right away, because another five minutes. I go back and knock the door and come in. He says, "I thought they shoot you." He says, "Almost, bishop." I says, "I wait now, night time, when it's night I'm going to try again." When the night come about ten o'clock, eleven o'clock, it's dark now. There's no electric or nothing down there. He says, "I went bed again. I don't see nobody, no guard, no nothing then. I run, I run, knock the door." He says, "Who is there?" From inside. I say, "The Bishop send me." I said, "Please," I said, "open the door. He want help." They opened the door. He says, "What happened?" He says, "Three days down there," he says, "we have no food, no gun, no nothing, and he want help." He said, "All right, not to worry. We help him." So they went to take them down there, then they had the guns and everything, so they were happy. They went down. So it took us five days now, because raining like anything. So when I'm ready to go back again my place now, my village, my father and mother. My father and mother, they heard they killed all the Christians, they started crying themselves. Finally I go, I was watching, ready to run, to come back, I see my, I see a fellow which my friend's father was, then I see my uncle. He says, "What? What are you doing here?" I says, "I was here, uncle," I says. "Now," he says, "what you're doing here?" He says, "Certain people send me in here to find out his son is killed or still living?" His son is the one I saw. He's the one. "Well," I said, "I'm sorry to tell you. I saw him. He died, and they throw him in the river. Poor guy, they give, he gave him money, his father give him money to go, because he's dangerous, you know. So anyway, he says, "I'm going to go back right away now." He says, "Uncle," he says, "I'm going to follow you." He says, "Son," he says, "I'm going to run." He says, "I'm going to run." He says, "I'll run with you," he says. "I'm not going to stay here no more." I says, "God knows what my father and mother are feeling." So, anyway, I went, I went with him now, we run, we run. And I have no shoes, I have nothing. I have one shirt. It was raining like anything. I started to shake. So finally I went home. I went home, took six, seven hours in that rain. I see a lot of people in my house. Who are these people in here? Everybody crying. Then they says, "Hey," my father and mother say, "Here's Armen!" And finally I got home safely, you know, everybody happy. They said, "We thought you got killed." So that's happened. That's what you were saying? ATANIAN: Yeah. I thought that would be a . . . LEVINE: It was an interesting story. HANISIAN: Interesting. Then when I had that trouble and all I says, "This is it. I'm not going to stay here no more." LEVINE: How old were you when this happened? HANISIAN: About twenty years old. LEVINE: About twenty. HANISIAN: About the same, the same year which I came this country. So I was so mad. Mad, you know. Always in danger. Always in danger. You can't sleep right. One gun shot your heard, right away, "Something happened, something happened?" In your mind, you know. So that's it. That's my life. LEVINE: Wow. ( break in tape ) Very, very interesting. Thank you. Is there anything else you'd like to say before we close? HANISIAN: What can I say? I said thanks to the American government, thanks to the people in here, they treated nice. And they did as much as they can for us. We did as much as we can for this country, and my country, my other people. My relatives and all, much as I can, much as we can out of it. So I was happy. I'm happy yet, I'm happy yet. I hope I be dying with the happiness, you know. That's all I could say. LEVINE: Well, thank you so much. HANISIAN: You're welcome, I'm sure. LEVINE: And this is Janet Levine for the National Park Service. I've been talking with Armen Hanisian, and I'm here in Clifton, New Jersey, and it's November 22, 1992, and Mr. Hanisian is ninety-two.