DANE: This is Debby Dane and I am speaking with Reverend Hartunian on Monday, February 3, 1986. we're beginning the interview at 10:42 and we're about to interview mr., Reverend Hartunian about his immigration experience from Armenia [sic] in 1920. He was about seven years old and this is Interview Number 166. Reverend Hartunian, we'll start with just how you began, your birth date and the year and what town you were born. HARTUNIAN: Uh, I was born February 11, 1915 in the city of Marash, we call it Marash and the Turks call it Maras, I think. And, uh, I spent my, uh, six and a half years in that city and during the genocide of the child and after the armistice more aware of what was going on, uh, as the troops of Mustafa Kemal began to drive toward the west and overwhelmed the Greek army and then finally reached Smyrna. But before they reached Smyrna, uh, they, uh, came into Marash and they continued the genocide of the Armenians. I as a child bear witness, uh, one church where some two thousand Armenians had gathered which the Turks surrounded and poured gasoline all around and set it on fire. I myself was in another church that they were trying to set on fire and my father thinking that this was the end of the family he just gathered us around and pulled the, uh, movable pews around us as if he were trying to protect us and said something that I will never forget, uh, "Don't be afraid my children because soon we will be in heaven together." And uh, fortunately someone discovered some secret tunnels that the French had dug, uh, from that church to another vantage point and we escaped in that way. DANE: Was it a Sunday service? Why, why were you in church at that point? HARTUNIAN: Oh we were, the church's were the only place that we could have some reasonable sense of protection. Uh, the Armenians in the houses were either shot or killed or burned because the Turks were trying to, uh, get rid of the Armenians and get the French to withdraw. The French had already decided to withdraw, that's why the Turks were able to do what they did. As a matter of fact, uh, the French troops there under their commanders, uh, did nothing to, uh, prevent the Turks from doing what they did. And another tragedy was that there were Armenian volunteers from France in, among those troops and they asked the commander if they could go by themselves and protect the Armenians and they were prevented. Uh, this was, uh not really the callousness of those troops but orders from headquarters that the French had decided to withdraw and the Mustafa Kemal's troops to do whatever they wanted to do. DANE: With the incident in the church that you recall for yourself with your father there, was the city occupied at that point? HARTUNIAN: Uh, the city was occupied by, uh, the Turkish army, yes. Uh, you see, after the armistice, uh, the Armenians, uh, had good reason to believe that the survivors could return to their towns and that they would be given protection and freedom and eventually the Armenian State or the Republic would be established. As a matter of fact, from 1918 to 1920 a Republic was established but when Mustafa Kemal was then supported by the English and the French and began to attack as their troops moved, uh, east, uh, west, uh, their troops also attacked the Republic of Armenia and Russia came down from the north and attacked the Republic of Armenia and the Republic was crushed and the two nations divided Armenian territory between themselves. So that's why today you have no Armenia in Turkey and practically no Armenians, uh, and you have the Soviet Armenian Republic where the Armenians have, uh, have a reasonable existence and have fared reasonably during the last 60. 65 years. DANE: Painting a picture of that day, uh, was it a day that you were in the church or did your parents had they taken you and said there's going to be trouble, there's soldiers here, we need to just stay at the church and we'll live there until things cool down? HARTUNIAN: Uh, we were in the church, uh, as I recall, uh, we went there for protection. Uh, and, uh, being there and seeing the other church burned and then having the Turks surround our church we were caught in that situation. And, uh, I think it was an afternoon when father offered this consolation and I can remember that as a child I don't remember terror, I don't remember terror. Uh, I had a sense of comfort and protection as long as one member of the family was with me. And as a child I also felt most secure in a group of those who were praying. This is very interesting because when we came to America, uh, I would cry if my parents did not take me to a mid-week prayer service and when they took me I would try to get in the center of the group and I would feel very comfortable there because in all the persecutions, uh, all the victims could do was gather together and pray and I remember that it was like an oasis in the, in the desert. Uh, so that has stayed with me. Uh, another effect of the genocide and I've been asked this question from several sources, uh, what are the permanent effects of the genocide, another effect is, uh, the fear and distrust of government. Uh, the word government which in Armenian is "garavarootune" has, is never a pleasant one, uh, not to me anyway, and other survivors can speak for themselves. But, uh, government to me has a connotation of tyranny, that you have to be afraid, you never know when they're going to clamp down on you, they're not there to protect you, uh, soldiers, gendarme was the word, uh, frightened me. Uh, Turkish officials frightened me. e always regarded them as, uh, perhaps, uh, uh, creatures of darkness that were always surrounding us and threatening us. So that when I came to America, uh, policemen in uniform frightened me, uh, and I've written a poem, I wrote this some time ago in which spontaneously one line says, "In the slavery of government I am free" ( he laughs), now why would I say that? If I were born in America I wouldn't say that "In the slavery of government I am free" so this is, this is the sense. Now another, uh, effect of the genocide is individuality, in other words in a sense to survive, uh, you have to really be on your own. That aspect is not very evident in me because I was a child dependent on my parents and on them. But I noticed that in survivors, as a clergyman, that, uh, they're ultra-individualists and they don't trust anyone essentially, not even their friends, uh, because in a genocide there is very little cooperation because you can't cooperate, uh, the human being develops all sorts of ingenious qualities of deception of, of escape, of patience, of, uh, endurance under troubles, so Armenians rarely complain about their troubles. We have a saying, uh, we say, "How are you feeling?" And the answer is, "I'm going to say I'm feeling well, so that I will feel well." (He laughs.) They never say, "I'm not feeling, uh, I'm feeling bad," say, uh, (Armenian expression) they say, uh, "I feel well so that I will be well." Prayer was to me, uh, almost like a weapon, uh, uh, whenever I was in trouble, I would pray, and, uh, and praying, usually I received tremendous answers to my prayer. Its very strange, I, I remember certain incidents of my youth when it was as if I was talking to a superior being and he was hearing me and things would change and he would answer my prayer. Uh, let me say, go forward to an incident in Smyrna. Uh, I was, uh, one of the, uh, lost children on the quai there, uh, while the city was burning and Turks were killing people, people were jumping in the water trying to get on the ships and, uh, I was, I finally was picked up by an American battleship, the Simpson, I remember the name. And, uh, what happened was, uh, we were put in little boats that were tired to the battleship, not tied but, uh, more or less associated to the battleship through a pulley system. They's push you into that little boat then the pulley would take the boat to the battleship and then we had to climb up a rope ladder up the side of the battleship to get on deck and I was only a kid of six and a half or so and I'm climbing, I'm climbing up this tope and suddenly I began to fall backwards half-way up and I remember praying immediately and I felt as if some hands pushed me right back on that boat. I never remember the experience and I rarely tell the experience but to this day I'm sure that some angelic being was there to push me back on the rope and then finally I got on deck and, of course, the ships were just crammed with people. Uh, the battleship or other types of ships of the nations were anchored in the Key of Smyrna not doing a thing to stop the Turks but tried to take their own citizens on board and many of them also took non-citizens on board who had come, uh, if they could take them on, many of them swam out to the ships and, uh, had hot water thrown on them because there was no room on the ship. Uh, so uh, there wa hunger on the ships and I remember, uh, three days hunger when there was no food and at the end of the three days, uh, we stood in line and they had made a fish dish of some sort and we had to hold our hands like this and they would slop the fish hash in our hands and we ate that like, boy, was it delicious. I f you were hungry for even one day even dog food will taste good. And it was really very, very meaningful to eat that. DANE: Two things, uh one for production purposes. Would you say, it was when the phone was ringing, that when uh, when you're frightened in times of trouble you pray, you said that. If you would repeat those words because the phone rang and if they ever needed to use it the phone is ringing beyond your words. HARTUNIAN: Yes, uh, as a youth I was very comfortable in the church and in prayer meetings because these were places of refuge during the genocide and, uh, I learned to pray in a way that I, I, I knew that I was speaking with the Lord or to an angel and my prayers would be answered, uh, many times and I did relate the time when, uh, I felt that it was answered, yes. DANE: Great. I'm going to take you back in time and then we move you back to Smyrna. Growing up, uh, your father went away at some point. HARTUNIAN: My father was a Protestant Minister and in close relationship with the American missionaries in Turkey, uh, who were missionaries of the Congregational Churches in America at that time. And these missionaries were, uh, very, very committed, they were courageous, uh, they helped the Protestant Armenians primarily because the other Armenians, the Orthodox Armenians, uh, were not too friendly with them because they felt the missionaries were trying to infringe upon their churches or religions. But, uh, during the genocide, uh, those many of those who survived, survived because of the assistance of these missionaries. Uh, the United States had not declared war against Turkey and so, uh, when my father was deported, uh, my mother and I, uh, were kept safe in the American hospital and my three sisters were kept as orphans in the German orphanage and they had to speak German. If they spoke any other language they were punished so they learned the language very quickly. Uh, all I remember is that I was hungry most of the time in my mother's arms and she had a brown bag of dried bread and cheese and whenever I cried for food she would give me a couple of nibbles of the bread and cheese because there was no food even in the American hospital. Everything was very, very limited. DANE: Did you know where your sisters had been taken? HARTUNIAN: Uh, I didn't know at that time. As a matter of fact, uh, uh, I just knew my mother and somehow I did, didn't. Incidentally I didn't know my father until I was five when my father returned and this might be of interest. I was so hungry that one day my mother told me to pray and she told me this is how I prayed--"God give us bread to eat, give us cheese to eat and give us Father to eat." You might say why did I say Father to eat. I probably had heard that during the genocide, uh, the conditions were so deep in their horror that, uh, and the hunger was so intense, that occasionally when one of the, uh, persons died their flesh would be eaten and I must have heard this and I was so hungry I said, "give us Father to eat", because I didn't know what a father was, I hadn't seen a father, but they were always talking about this nice person, you know the father. And when I saw him on his return I was very afraid of him because his beard had grown real long and he was a man who had just come out of a dungeon as it were, you know. But he had a red apple which I had seen for the first time. I had never seen an apple or an orange and he held this red apple and then I saw the red apple and I went to him and that was the first time we embraced--a father and son. It was a very poignant experience. DANE: Was that at the hospital? HARTUNIAN: Uh, this was, uh, possibly in our home in Marash because after the Armistice, as i said, the surviving Armenians felt they were now safe to return to their homes and to their towns to be re-established. And uh, I think this was at this time. DANE: As a child, up until you went to the hospital, what kind of life did you have? Did your mother work, was it a normal existence in a city or as long as you can remember-- HARTUNIAN: Well, remember, I was in my mother's womb when my parents had learned that the Turkish government had decided to exterminate the Armenians. So, here they were in the situation, uh, of uh, pronounced death and, as I said, my father was deported and I did not know him. Uh, all I remember is, uh, being with my mother. I don't even remember being with my sisters until after the Armistice. I, I remember because my eldest sister, uh, saved me, took me on her back and walked with me through deep snow to a safe place after we left that church that I mentioned. All I remember as a child, is a, uh, uh, very threatening outer environment and very comforting relationship with my mother and wherever I was it was as if, you know, I always had to be somewhere I was protected. DANE: And how long were you taking refuge in the American hospital? HARTUNIAN: Oh I think that we were there, in that hospital for uh, a year and a half, yeah, yeah. You just stayed there, you just never went out. I, the only toys I remember, toys, I say toy. The only toy I had that I remember as a toy was a empty spool which the missionaries had given my mother and a rubber band and like a clip and, uh, uh, I had put notches in the spool and I would, uh, you know, twirl it and see it move a little bit. But that's the only toy I remember. I don't remember any toys, I never had toys as a child. Uh, the only other toy I remember was a doll that the missionaries had and, uh, I was very attracted to that doll. Uh, but it was not mine. DANE: Was it a cloth doll? HARTUNIAN: It was, it was sort of a, uh, uh, it had clothing on it but it was a girl doll. It was very pretty to me and, uh, I, I, often wondered why I couldn't play with it, you know. DANE: How did you see it, were they-- HARTUNIAN: Somebody else had it or it was in the hospital compound somewhere there, which, which I remember. Another experience I had was, uh, you know, if you eat dry bread and cheese as a child, uh, something new is very attractive, so someone had given my mother dried, uh, dried, uh, cherries, dried cherries. And she gave me one or two and I cried for more and she said, "No, we'll keep these for later." And later when she opened them in a few days they were all wormy and so we couldn't eat them or we didn't eat them. Uh, that has done something to me in my life, uh, I never keep any food (he laughs). Uh, you know, to me you have food, you eat it, forget about tomorrow (he laughs) because the worms will come (he laughs) because we never had refrigeration there or anything like that. DANE: How often would they feed you at the hospital, did you get-- HARTUNIAN: Mother would give me a piece of bread and cheese whenever I cried. DANE: And that was it. HARTUNIAN: And that was all I remember. I don't remember anything else that I ate but there was whole wheat bread, you know, dry whole wheat which was nourishing I suppose, the cheese was nourishing. I don't remember anything else. They must have given me other things but I don't remember. DANE: And as far as entertainment, you had that one toy. Would your mother tell you stories, how did she occupy a child of six years old? HARTUNIAN: Well, my mother would always put, uh, surrounded me with her love. She naturally was in traumatic situation because her, she didn't know whether her husband was living or dead. He was on this death march. She didn't know what was happening to her daughters. Here she was in a prison-like with me. But, uh, all I remember was, uh, she was a silent, uh, love, always, always, always with me. And I make a point of this when I lecture on the genocide to young people and the point is that if you have an integrated, loving family, no outside problem can really affect you very seriously, uh, because that is the center of life's meaning, really. DANE: Historically, you were there at the hospital and then the Armistice came and you were returned home, your father-- HARTUNIAN: Yes, my father came back, we returned to our home which had not been destroyed at that time. Uh, then the, uh, the joy and peace and, uh, the reunions of the survivors. My father in his memoirs says he began to marry Armenians again, it lasted a very short time and then, uh, the whole situation changed because the Allies, uh, you see the Allies defeated Turkey and, uh, the purpose was never to have the Turkish government re-established again because so many minority peoples had suffered so cruelly under them. Uh, when the French and the English and the Russians began their political maneuvers, you will recall France took the mandate over Lebanon, over Syria. England went into what is now Iran and Russia wanted to come in and fill that vacuum and England got jealous of Russia, and England and France began to disagree about their extent of control. So secretly England began to arm Mustafa Kemal who had revolted against the central power there that was re-established under the Allies and the French began to give him arms also. The French hoping that the English won't get too much footage there and the English hoping that the Russians and French won't get too much too, so here was a man had the encouragement of his enemies to re-establish Turkey. And, uh, he did a terrific job. He, uh, he pushed the, uh, he pushed the Greeks back and they left their citizens in Smyrna and retreated to their territory and the, uh, Mustafa Kemal's troops were ordered to clean out the remaining Armenians and that's where our tragedy began. And most of the tragedies that I experienced, were, uh, from 1920 to 1922 around that or 1919 to 1922. DANE: At what point did your father decide its time to go to America? Or was that an option, did he say we're setting out for America or we're just leaving Marash? HARTUNIAN: Uh, he reached a point, you see, when, when the Armistice was signed and the surviving Armenians began to return, he was hopeful. But then as these conditions that I described developed, he reached the point where he realized there was no more hope. And he, uh, planned to escape from Turkey. It was, uh, when his plans were still not complete that the american missionaries came to him and said, "We have secret information that they're going to exterminate your family, you're on the death list." So that night we were put in this American, uh, truck and we were covered over with a canvas the whole family, everyone except my brother who was Tarsus at that time. And about 2:00am in the morning, uh, E. Stanley Jones and some others drove us out of Turkey into Syria which was completely under French mandate at that time. And so the picture I will show you downstairs is that, uh, he took that picture soon as we went across. DANE: Do you remember that night, did you father come and wake you up, were you sleeping? HARTUNIAN: I don't remember the details, uh, I probably was sleeping but I had gotten so used to emergencies and, uh, running here and there and, uh, you know, uh, being, always holding onto the coattails of one of the members of my family, I was the youngest. But I do remember the auto trip and I do remember the relief when the canvas was removed over us so we could breath the air and when we reached the Syrian border and crossed I think it was about 4:30 in the morning when the sun was just rising or 5:00 when he took the picture because there was no flash in those days it was just the black and white, yes. DANE: This is the end of side one, Reverend Hartunian, its 11:10, Number 166. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO DANE: This is the beginning of side two, Reverend Hartunian, Interview Number 166, Its 11:15. You've just crossed the border into Syria, uh, you've left your home. Did you bring clothes, food, anything with you that you remember? HARTUNIAN: The clothes on our back and, uh, small suitcases of items as I recall. We were taken to the home of a friend of my father's where we had our, where I experienced for the first time, spaghetti and ground meat. That's what they served us and I remember very clearly, spaghetti and ground meat, I never tasted that before. DANE: Did you like it? HARTUNIAN: I like it. I liked it very much, yes. And we stayed there for awhile and then father wrote to his american friends here in America and, uh, there was a tremendous outpouring of concern and love in America for the Armenian survivors and, uh, churches were praying for us and raising funds and one person, Dr. Wilson sent $500 to my father and Dr. Fredfield Goodsell here in Boston sent three hundred dollars so with those eight hundred dollars my father, uh, bought, uh passage and we went from Aleppo, we took a boat, a French boat, and we sailed to Smyrna which was under Greek control and my father felt Smyrna was a very safe place and there was a church there that wanted my father to preach there as a, I think as an interim minister, I'm not sure whether there was a permanent position or not and that trip incidentally was shocking to me and to the family in the sense that, uh, it was beyond our comprehension in its comfort and in its food. It was a French ship and it was, even though it was third class, they treated us royally. And, uh, the family was not a wine drinker but every table would have bottles of wine on it and the food was beyond our imagination so it was as if the sinner had been put into heaven and he didn't know why he got there. (He laughs.) That I remember very vividly that for a trip on that French boat-- DANE: What kind of food would they give you? Do you remember? HARTUNIAN: Good French food, fish and with a lot of sauces and things. It was unbelievable, it was, you know, uh, like giving you, giving a child a treat, you know, with candy or something like that. So we arrived in Smyrna and we had a very pleasant experience in Smyrna for three months. Then the tragedy struck again, in Smyrna. DANE: Were you planning to stay in Smyrna or was the eventual goal always to come to America? HARTUNIAN: My father's dream and prayer always was I must get my family to America. And I'm not sure at this time whether there was any longterm plan to stay in Smyrna, but I do know that three months we had a very happy time there and then tragedy struck and the tragedy was, uh, sort of eerie for our family because my father after all his experiences still believed in the integrity of governments. He never believed that the Greek army would withdraw from Smyrna. So even though there were rumors, he didn't believe the rumors. Uh, when the troops of Mustafa Kemal struck and the Greek army retreated, uh, we were in our house and we were having supper down on the basement. Mother had put the soup in front of each one of us, we always had family togetherness at supper with a prayer and as soon as my father finished the prayer we heard the screams from the neighbor. The Turks had attacked the house next door, a band of Turks, not an army, just a band. And they were either extorting money or raping the woman or what, but we knew that tragedy had struck, so my mother, my father lost his composure at that time but my mother was the one who really saved us. She opened the basement window, we were down on the ground floor, she looked right and left, the streets were empty, the band of Turks were in the house and she said to father, "Put on this fez." So father put on the fez so anyone seeing him would think he was Turk and we all crawled out of that little window and ran from the house to the American compound which was, I would say, several blocks away. When we reached the compound, the door was closed and we knocked on the door and cried but they wouldn't open the door because they saw father's fez and they thought we were Turks (he laughs). But finally we got our message across and they opened the door and we were in the american compound. Now there were several thousand Armenians who were taking refuge there and the compound had the American flag over it with American Marines, uh, they were there trying to get all the Americans eventually out. They in a sense betrayed us, I have to say this, father was in communication with, uh, with, uh, officers there. They told father, "You stay here in front of the door and we will, uh, we have a conference and we'll be back." And while father was in from of the main door, with thousands of armenians in the compound, one of Armenians came and said, "The Americans are leaving from the back." What they had done is gathered and they left from the back of the compound with the American flag flying, they were marching toward the key. When my father heard this, and incidentally there were Turkish soldiers in from of the gate there, and when my father heard this, he knew that there was no alternative because there was some evidence the Turks were ready to burn the compound. So he told the people to open the door and just go out and follow the Americans. The miracle there was I think that the Turks really saw that we were a part of the American compound or something because they didn't open fire and I remember that march from the compound to the key, uh, many times we had to march between two walls of flames because all the houses were set on fire and my mother fainted and she said leave me here and go ahead and however, finally brother and father picked her up and we reached the key and it was father who took me and my sister looking at the shore what was happening, saw Dr. Wilson whom he knew as the American who was taking on Americans on the battleship. So he ran up to Dr. Wilson and said, "Save my children." And while he was saying save my children he pushed me and my sister into that little boat and Dr. Wilson just didn't say anything, he just gave orders for the boat to be pulled and that's how I got on that battleship (he laughs). DANE: As a child, flames, your mother saying to leave me here, this person who has been your connection to life, do you remember-- HARTUNIAN: Well all, I don't remember, uh, I really don't remember any panic on my part, or fear, it was if I was observing, it was as if I was observing, the closest I can come to was actually sitting and watching such a tragedy on TV. Somehow as a child, I don't remember, uh, being fully involved in what was happening. Somehow I always felt it was happening out there and I was observing it and its very strange but that's the way I feel about it. DANE: And when you were in the boat watching your father stand on the port and the boat's moving closer to this battleship-- HARTUNIAN: It was just my sister and I at first, I didn't know whether anybody else was going to come, my sister and I stuck close together and then what happened was that Dr. Wilson took father and mother and my two sisters also and my brother who was somewhere else, he got an to another boat somehow and we met in Greece after the boats pulled out and took us to Greece. DANE: Were you afraid you'd be separated, did you cry? HARTUNIAN: There was always, there was always the fear of separation, yes. Crying, I don't remember too many crying, but I remember hunger and one incident I will never forget, my father and I, as I said, for three days that the boat was anchored there and the ship was so crowded that there was no place to lie down, most people were sitting down or standing up and there was sort of a protrusion on the side of the, of the deck of that battleship where you could sit down, in other words a the battleship goes up and this is the deck, you could sit up on the shelf as it were. So my father and I were sitting on that shelf and we were watching the city burn and that night if you have ever seen a city burning at night it's like hell and you hear the screams of the people and what not. And so my father, I noticed was, just couldn't keep his eyes open, and so here I am six and a half year boy and I looked at him and I said, "Dad, put your head on my shoulders and go to sleep." I'll never forget that, I mean just hungry and I think I put my head on his shoulder and fell asleep. DANE: Were you aware that people were being killed, that there was death going on? HARTUNIAN: Oh yes, oh yes, yes, its uh, uh, in fact some of those experiences and scenes, uh, are with me and my thinking and my, you know, relationships are colored by, many times I was deeply impressed by the death of the astronauts because all that, I even saw that as a genocide, you know. It was, to me a terrible experience and then the idea that the government planned all this, you know, of course, that's a misinterpretation but I made that connection, that government's are no good (he laughs). That government's kill people, okay? DANE: Uh, so that we get everything in. At what point, was it on the battleship then that you went to Greece and then were able to come to this country? HARTUNIAN: My recollection is that either it was this battleship or we transferred to another ship which went to Piraeus. There was, I think it was the port of Athens. Piraeus is, was a refugee camp nearby which was set up by the American government and other governments and also by Armenian organizations. And in Piraeus, uh, we were given a room about this size or even smaller for the entire family to live in. We were there for about three months in Piraeus. We learned Greek (he laughs) and we were fed by the relief organizations but an outstanding experience is, here's the whole family hungry, we've just arrived and they put us into this little room and my father came in with a big smile on his face and a dish in his hand, he had, uh, been given or something bar--. He had like barbecued lamb, uh, which here's a father feeding his family which he was not able to do, you see, all those years and I think most people who were in the relative luxury of America don't understand the anguish of parents who can't feed their children and the joy when they can feed them, so that experience I can remember very vividly. And each one took a little piece and it was like a communion. So, uh, we were there three months and then father made, got his passports and visas or whatever he did and some money came from America and we took a third class passage to America on the ship they called King Alexander. It took 23 days across the Atlantic and the stormy weather was beyond the imagination. We thought we were sunk several times. The food was mostly macaroni, everybody was vomiting except me. I didn't vomit and during the storm I would go up, hold onto, on deck hold onto something (he laughs), you know, watch the storm, I never forgot that. And, uh, finally we arrived in America and that's, that picture shows, that's all we had, the clothes on our backs, uh, that's all we had. DANE: No belongings, no-- HARTUNIAN: No belongings, we didn't even have a, we didn't even have a trunk. That's all we had, just that. And, uh, then the story on Ellis Island, of course, uh, is an interesting one as is related in the memoirs of my father. Uh, we had fears that my mother would not be permitted to enter-- DANE: Why is that? HARTUNIAN: Because, uh, I think the Syrian, she was a Syrian. I think the Syrian quota was filled. And only when they learned that she was a teacher, they accepted her on the basis of her profession and my father and mother had problems with their eyes, and they had to be in the hospital there at Ellis Island and we children were separated from our parents, uh, my, I and the three sisters were together. They let me go into the women's quarters for some reason because I was the little one, the one who was there to take care, my brother was in the men's quarter and, uh, I think we were there about two months or so before we were able to get on the land in New York, uh, I remember several things on Ellis Island. First of all the blankets that they gave us which were highly disinfected and uh-- DANE: What did that mean? HARTUNIAN: Uh, I didn't like that. It meant that, I don't know what it meant because disinfecting was not something we were used to-- DANE: Were they stiff? HARTUNIAN: No they smelled bad. You know, they smelled of disinfectant and each person got a blanket and we were given cots that were on top of each other and, uh, the cots had mattresses, there was reasonable comfort but the wildness was at the dinner tables. We would see these very, uh, beautiful set long tables with napkins and dishes of butter and bread. As soon as they opened the doors the butter and bread would disappear because people were so hungry for the butter but if you were able to get that butter and bread you were very lucky (he laughs) and always the people, the decorum that was expected, was not possible for the people who had come there as refugees after horrendous experiences and hunger and so there was a sort of bedlam often in the dining halls. But eventually, everybody was reasonably fed, the food was good. I had my first taste of a banana which I did not like but I had my first taste of a ham sandwich which I loved, boiled ham, boiled ham sandwich and I had never tasted anything so good as a boiled ham sandwich. Uh, so, uh, the Statue of Liberty I remember, you know, and I remember the idea that America was paradise, the streets were covered with gold, this was literally spoken, that the streets of America were covered with gold. DANE: Did you hear that on the boat or even when you-- HARTUNIAN: No, no, even in the old country they used to say that, and so-- DANE: Did you as a child imagine that? HARTUNIAN: Yeah, the idea was that we were coming from hell into heaven, you know, hell into heaven and wherever I go incidentally, I tell the young people, I speak on the genocide quite often that, uh, they ought to have an appreciation of America with all its ups and downs, with all its faults, uh, this is a paradise with what people go through in other countries and we should all work to maintain our democracy and the strength of this government. Armenians are very, very appreciative of what America has done for them. We just don't like the government today that tries to abet the Turkish position that the genocide never took place and for political reasons but I think they will lose on that issue because, "Truth though crushed to earth will rise again." (He laughs.) Incidentally, when we left Ellis Island we got on a train to go to Buffalo where my mother had an uncle who'd come years before, had a brother who had come years before. This is a very interesting, uh, incident. My mother's is Shushan, shon, S-H-U-S-H-A-N, Shusan, which in Armenian means lily, lily, Shusan, so we're on this train and this train is going along and also my father says in Armenian to my mother, "Isn't it strange someone is calling you, who would you know here?" And we were rather puzzled when all of a sudden we see a man coming down the, uh, uh, yelling , "Shoe shine, shoe shine" ( he laughs). Imagine new arrivals, uh, who can't distinguish between one language and another, hearing this it was a most amazing thing, yes. We were with my uncle for three months about in Buffalo then my father received an invitation to be associate minister in a church in Philadelphia, an Armenian church. So finally we went to Philadelphia and that's where my American life really began, in West Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. DANE: Now your name, Hartunian, was it ever thought about changing it to Hart and--? HARTUNIAN: No, originally it Haroutunian, H-A-R-O-U-T-U-N-I-A-N, we just simply changed it to, H-A-R-T-U-N-I-A-N, Hartunian, it just made it simpler. No we, uh, a number of Armenians, you know, changed their names to Americanized forms because the early years of the Armenians here were years of fear and shame and lack of accommodation and they tried to forget and changing their names was another way of saying we're in a new situation. But, uh, that was a minority that did that, most armenians kept their names and we kept our names too. DANE: And what does it mean, you told me that it meant-- HARTUNIAN: Well it really means. "One who has been resurrected from the dead." Haroutun, we say Christos Haroutun, that is Christ rose from the dead so Haroutunian, I-A-N meaning one who, one who has risen from the dead and in a sense we did rise from the dead. And in the poem that I referred to, uh, I say, "I am alive because I have died. Nations conspire to dig my grave but I hold the scales of justice,' and then the, my apprehension about government comes out in the line, uh, "In the slavery of governments I am free." because the government to me was to me, was a negative factor, an organization, that threatens your life and your peace and stole your goods and left you desolate. DANE: Do you remember the poem enough to recite it-- HARTUNIAN: Sure, sure-- DANE: Tell me the title. HARTUNIAN: The title is, "I am An Armenian" and it goes like this-- "I am an Armenian, I belong to an ancient race, whose roots are in the subsoil of history, and whose branches pierce the sky of man's hopes. I have know ignorance and worship false gods but once I saw the light I have never wavered from the path of truth. My alphabet was not created for the babblings of earth but to proclaim the will, the word of God. I am alive because I have died. Nations conspire to dig my grave but I hold the scales of justice. I own no territory but the world is mine and the slavery of governments I am free. He who touches me, touches God. He who walks with me walks toward the light. I am the silent voice that stills the thunder of the world, I am primordial dust and will consume the world in the fires of love." DANE: When did you write that? HARTUNIAN: Uh, one night my wife usually has a pad and paper and pencil with her when we travel, so one night around 2:00am I woke up and I woke her up and I said, "Do you have a pad next to you?" And she said, "Yes." With bleary eyes I said, "Take this down." So I recited this poem, she took it down, I woke up in the morning, I took her scribbles and I came into the office, I typed it out and I changed the position of two of the statements and there it was. It came sort of a flash, an inspiration, I'll give you a blue, a red ribbon with that on it before you leave. DANE: Amazing. In the last few minutes, uh, sort of an overview exactly. You're an armenian, you're still involved in the Armenian community, very closely. You have your American citizenship. HARTUNIAN: Right. DANE: A discussion about those two coming together, your roots from where you were born and the things that have shaped your life, and that yet you have spent the majority of your life in America. Are you American or Armenian? HARTUNIAN: We call ourselves American-Armenians or Armenian-Americans. Uh, actually, uh, we're 100 percent American especially in the context of, uh, today's Americanism which has its emphasis in the ethnicity of the, uh, human structure that makes up this nation. So, we feel that to be fully Armenian, uh, is at the same time to be fully American just as we would feel that to be fully Jewish is the same time to be fully American.Uh, american greatness is, I think, in this. Whereas today in, uh, Turkey they claim there are no, there are no Kurds, there are no Armenians, everybody is Turkish if they're not we get rid of them and Bulgaria, the Turks are in peril, in Bulgaria they try to say you're not Turks, you're Bulgarians. In America, you're American, you're Armenian; you're Jewish, you're American; you're Italian, you're American; and in that sense we're Americans, we're Armenians. I love this country. I don't know whether I should say this but, uh, I think right now if I had a choice, if there was a free and independent Armenia, I would praise and uplift it but I would stay an American (he laughs). So I thin all peoples of the world have to be proud of America and in the history of the world I think America has really demonstrated that, uh, that it is, uh, the freest, the bravest, and the government that involves the people most, so we're very appreciative, so if it wasn't for America I wouldn't be here; if it wasn't for the American missionaries I wouldn't be here; if it wasn't for the freedom of this government I would never have learned this language. I would never have had this church, so all of these are very positive factors and the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island are very, very meaningful symbols and they have to be preserved, they have to be preserved. DANE: This is the end of side two, Reverend Hartunian, Interview Number 166, it is 11:45.