SIGRIST: Good afternoon, this is Paul Sigrist for the National Park Service. Today is Sunday, August 7th, 1994. I am in the Ellis Island Recording Studio with Patrick Henderson. Mr. Henderson came from Ireland in 1923. He was sixteen years old when he arrived in America. Anyway, Mr. Henderson, thank you for taking time out from your visit to come up here. HENDERSON: It's perfectly all right. SIGRIST: Can we begin by you giving me your birth date, please? HENDERSON: Yes. August 17, 1907. SIGRIST: My goodness, it's almost your birthday. (they laugh) And where in Ireland were you born? HENDERSON: I was born in a little town in County Kilkenny. Urlingford is the name of the town. SIGRIST: Can you spell the name of the town for us? HENDERSON: Yes. U-R-L-I-N-G-F-O-R-D. SIGRIST: And, and you said that it was in County Kilkenny? HENDERSON: That's right. SIGRIST: Whereabouts in Ireland is that generally? HENDERSON: In the south, southern part of Ireland. SIGRIST: Can you tell me a little bit about what the town looked like when you were a child growing up? HENDERSON: The, the town? SIGRIST: Yes. HENDERSON: Yes. It'd be a town with about one long street, maybe two, two streets long. It had at one end a, a school, an elementary school, and on the other of the town would be a church, the church of the area which was Catholic at that time. And the description was there might be about seven or eight business houses in the town. SIGRIST: What was the major industry? What did most people do who lived in the town? HENDERSON: There was very little industry in, in the town in that particular, at that particular time. Most of the, I'm trying to think of the industries that would have been there at that time. It was practically none, except they worked in the stores or in the, it was a farming community all around there. And the only thing, the work there would be to work in the stores in the town, like... SIGRIST: You said there... HENDERSON: ...shopboy or a, or work around the yards or something like that in the town. SIGRIST: You said that it was a farming area... HENDERSON: A farming area outside the town. Later, when I left, when I, when we lost our business in the town, I was raised with my grandmother out on a farm. SIGRIST: What business was your family in, in town? HENDERSON: They were in a, in a kind of, I would call it a combination of, they rented out farming equipment. They also had a hotel and they had a liquor license. They served liquor. And ran a general store. SIGRIST: Can you tell me what memories you have of the hotel and, and any stories associated with, with the hotel in your family? HENDERSON: Not exactly but from, I was a little too young when I was taken to the farm. But I can tell you from what I hear that, I'm trying to think, I, I really don't remember the various things on that because I was about a little over two when I was taken out onto our farm. SIGRIST: How did, how did your family lose that business? HENDERSON: Through bad debts. There was plenty of bad debts. And there was no more money to be made, so they had to sell the property in order to pay off where they owe the money, yeah. SIGRIST: I see. What was your father's name? HENDERSON: James Henderson. SIGRIST: Can you tell me a little bit about your father's background? HENDERSON: Uh, not much. He came from a farming community, too. And he married my mother, which was left the business by her uncle. And the both of them managed the business in the town. SIGRIST: What was your father's personality like? HENDERSON: He was a great sportsman. He liked to go to various sports. He was a, I think he was a very lively, very active man. He was, he was also, when, when we'd have people at the hotel, maybe they'd come in for to go shooting or something, on a day's outing he would go, travel with them and show them the various spots that they could enjoy the day. SIGRIST: So he knew the countryside well. HENDERSON: Oh, yeah. He knew the countryside well because he was acquainted with the entire area for miles around. SIGRIST: When you think back to your childhood, is there a story that comes to mind about your father, maybe something you two... HENDERSON: Yes. SIGRIST: ...did together or...? HENDERSON: Yes. He had a business. He, he also traveled for the Singer Sewing Machine Company as, as a salesman for their product. And at the time I was, they told me that at the time I was born he was traveling away, far away from the country. They had to try to get in touch with him. Of course, communications were very poor in that day. So they had to, they tell me that they weren't able to get in touch with him for a couple of weeks before, to come back that I was born. (they laugh) That's the only thing I remember. SIGRIST: What was your mother's name? HENDERSON: Annie Henderson. SIGRIST: And what was her maiden name? HENDERSON: Annie Holohan. SIGRIST: Can you spell that, please? HENDERSON: H-O-L-O-H-A-N. SIGRIST: And tell me a little bit about your mother's background and, and the family that she came from. HENDERSON: Uh, I'm trying to get it straight. She was born to a farming community. Her, her father's name was James Holohan and her mother's name was, it's funny, I forget. Being with this that makes me forget the thing. I was, I was raised in that house with my grandmother. I should, should never forget her name. SIGRIST: So, it was your mother's mother, then that you went to live with after the family hit bad times. HENDERSON: That is right. After she came, after they came to Ameri--, after she came to America, my father stayed there. SIGRIST: Your father stayed in Ireland and your mother came to America. HENDERSON: He stayed in Ireland and my mother came to America. SIGRIST: Oh, well, that's interesting. HENDERSON: Yeah. SIGRIST: Can you tell me a little bit about why they did that arrangement? HENDERSON: I don't know. I think my mother felt that she'd be the person that could make more money, I guess, that was it, and bring us all out here, bring the children out. There was seven of us in the family. SIGRIST: Did all seven of you go to live with your grandparents, your grandmother? HENDERSON: No. The older ones were put in boarding school and received a better, much better education than probably I did. SIGRIST: So the kids were sort of split up, then, after. HENDERSON: The family was split up. SIGRIST: How soon after you were taken to your grandmother that your, your mother went to America? HENDERSON: About a year, I guess, after I went there. SIGRIST: Soon thereafter, then. HENDERSON: Yeah. SIGRIST: What job did your mother get in America? HENDERSON: She was working as a cook for a very wealthy family in New York, the Saternees [ph]. They were relatives of the Morgans. I believe they're, they were probably in one of those apartment-hotels on Park Avenue. SIGRIST: What was your mother's personality like? HENDERSON: She was more business-like, I guess. And (used?) enough of money to bring us all out here gradually as we grew up. First, of course, there was my oldest brother, and sisters, brought them out. They made a home in America. Our first home in New York was a house that was going to be torn down and they gave us an apartment there, a company called the Iselin [ph] Company, gave her an apartment there just to take care of that. They had to have somebody on the premises to cover the insurance. And that was our first apartment in America. SIGRIST: (he laughs) Was that, was that where she was living all that time she was here by herself or...? HENDERSON: No, when she, my brother was here with her at that time. SIGRIST: So, so your mother and your brother came. HENDERSON: That's right, I'm sorry. I might have made a mistake on that. My mother and my brother. SIGRIST: Tell me what you remember about living in your grandmother's house. HENDERSON: Oh, it was very nice because it was a farm and, of course, I, I enjoyed the farm very well. SIGRIST: What were some of the things you enjoyed doing on the farm? HENDERSON: Of course, there was always chores. As soon as I started going to school, there was always, I had to bring the cows home. And I had to, they had to go to pasture in various areas and move them every so often. And I'd be, but, I'd take the milk to a creamery to be pasteurized to, not pasteurized but to make butter, of course. And I enjoyed that. SIGRIST: Who milked the cows? HENDERSON: Oh, as I got older, 'twas one job I had to do before I go to school was to milk at least one. SIGRIST: How does one, how does one milk a cow? Can you describe it for us? HENDERSON: Oh, yes. It shouldn't be very hard. I, I've lost the word for that... (he gestures) SIGRIST: The udder? HENDERSON: You have to go and make sure you go on the proper side of the cow. Place a pail underneath and have a small milking stool to sit on so as you can reach in there to get the udders. And you have a certain way or otherwise the milk won't come out. You learn it after they show you how it's done. Then you fill a pail with milk and when it's full you just take it in. We had the milk to drink right from the cow. No pasteurization. SIGRIST: What other animals did you have on the farm? HENDERSON: Oh, horses, of course. We didn't have any, I'm trying to think of the various animals we had. Oh, of course, pigs were raised there, pigs for their own food. Every so often, every three months they would kill a pig. SIGRIST: Can you describe that for me, please? HENDERSON: Oh, it's gruesome. I never want to even think of it. (he laughs) First they stun them with a hammer. That's to stun him that he doesn't, supposed not to feel the pain but he sure must feel the pain of the hammer. And they stick a sharp knife in his neck, then, that bleeds him, you know. The blood is saved and is used for making puddings. That's how we get our blood puddings, various blood puddings at various times. SIGRIST: Was your grandmother a good cook? HENDERSON: Yes, a very, fairly, very good. I would say very good. SIGRIST: What kinds of food did you eat when you were growing up with your grandmother? HENDERSON: Oh, of course, every, in the morning there'd be, mostly it'd be oatmeal cereal and, food wouldn't be very like we have here. You wouldn't have the food you have here. We'd have, we had plenty of butter and milk and mostly the liquid there would be tea, mostly tea. Fireplace, of course, would be of peat. It's have a, a fireplace on the hearth. That was comfortable because you sit right in close to the fire in the wintertime there. SIGRIST: Now, where would you get the peat? HENDERSON: In a local, we had a local bog right near us, a local peat bog, where it was dug out of the ground. And I've spent a few days on there. They put you working on there, too, during your vacation in the summertime when they'd be cutting the peat. My job would be to catch, as they cut that wet sod to be up on the bank and catch that wet sod. Now, there was a certain way to catch that. If you didn't catch it by both ends, of course, it broke. It fell down and broke. And you put it on a, on a wheelbarrow and then there was another young boy there and he would wheel that out and spread it to dry. And you had to keep filling that barrow as fast as he could wheel them out and as fast as the man that was cutting it could, and you could catch them and putting them on there. It was a, it was a job, it was a hard job for somebody. And you had to eat. You had no, you couldn't go home from there so you took all your eats with you that you were going to eat during the day while you worked there. SIGRIST: Do you remember what kind of thing you would take with you to eat for lunch? HENDERSON: Yes. It would be, of course, they would take a kettle to boil the, they would set a fire up there and they would take a kettle and put it on and boil, for to make the tea. And there'd be sandwiches in the luncheon basket, I guess, to have with the tea. And that would be the luncheon, yeah. They would have breakfast before they'd leave the house and, of course, then they wouldn't eat again 'til they come home after, in the evening, late in the evening. SIGRIST: Would the peat also be used to heat the homes as well as well as to cook the food? HENDERSON: Ah, yes. That was their means of heating, yeah. They would also travel a distance and get some coal. They'd get probably, uh, coal to mix with the, with the peat. But the peat was the main fireplace. SIGRIST: Did your grandmother live in a big house? Can you maybe describe the house? HENDERSON: It was a farm house with three rooms upstairs, a large, a very large kitchen, they all had large kitchens, and a living room. Very seldom do we go in the living, only when we'd have company home or something. SIGRIST: Is there a piece of furniture that sticks out in your mind? HENDERSON: Oh, yeah. They had nice furniture there. They had a sideboard with plenty of glasses and (glass work?) on there. And closets for to keep, "corner closets" as we call them, which we'd keep the dishes in. These dishes would only be used on special occasions. The other dish, dishes would hang in the kitchen for, for family use. And one thing I remember is that they had plenty of milk. There was always milk. There'd be a gallon of milk brought in there in the morning, from the cows, to put away for the day that wouldn't be used to go to the creamery. And there'd be a gallon of milk brought in in the evening after the cows were milked. So there was two gallons of milk there for maybe, for my grandmother and her, her son was there and he married, and his wife and me. And we, for that many people it was a lot of milk. SIGRIST: Was there some way of keeping food cool in the house? HENDERSON: No, that was a problem. The, the climate there, the food would keep at least a day without any problem. And for butter they would put it in the coolest part of the house and it would still keep. They'd take in butter there. They'd make butter there in a roll of about seven pounds at a time, so there was always plenty of butter, yeah. SIGRIST: I see. HENDERSON: Butter and milk there was plenty of. SIGRIST: What religion were you? HENDERSON: Catholic, Irish Catholic... SIGRIST: And can you tell me how you practiced your religion at home? HENDERSON: At home it would be usually, the Rosary would be said every night, given out by the oldest member of the family which was my grandmother. And that we had every night in the house as long as I remember, unless there was some special occasion that we had to go somewhere else. SIGRIST: There was a church near your grandmother's or...? HENDERSON: Yeah, you traveled to church by walking across what they called "the Mass path," which instead of walking all around the road, you cut through fields. SIGRIST: And what was that called? HENDERSON: The Mass path. SIGRIST: Mass path. HENDERSON: Path. Yeah, what you walked through. And sometimes this field would be very large and the path would be in the center. SIGRIST: Was your grandmother a religious woman? HENDERSON: Yes, yes. Very religious, I would say. SIGRIST: Can you tell me how you celebrated Christmas? HENDERSON: Oh, yes. Christmas was a special morning. Most of the year we eat poor but on Christmas my, my uncle's wife that was, she was new in there. He married since I was taken out there. And his wife would get up very early in the morning and cooked special things, special meats that she had got from the butcher's like, which we wouldn't have during the week. And she would cook them and have them ready by the time we got up. That would be a special breakfast which we wouldn't see again 'til next Christmas. (he laughs) And, of course, for the dinner we would have goose. That was a special treat. Our neighbor raised goose, geese, so every Christmas they would bring one up to our house. And in return they would have the use of our pump for water. We had a deep pump for water, so they would have to come up and get their pails of water at our pump. That I remember, yeah. SIGRIST: Did you exchange presents for Christmas at all or...? HENDERSON: Uh, my, I did get one present from my oldest brother. That was before he came to America and I was very small. And I remember very well it was a pipe, imitation tobacco and I think I had a pen knife with that. But I remember it was a pipe to make me look big. And I'd put this pipe in my mouth and, of course, pretend I was smoking like the rest of the family. SIGRIST: (he laughs) What a great memory you have. HENDERSON: Yeah. SIGRIST: Tell me a little bit about school. How old were you when you began school? HENDERSON: I probably was five. SIGRIST: And was school taught in English or in Gaelic? HENDERSON: No, in English. SIGRIST: In English. HENDERSON: In that time. I'd be probably in what was called, there they called it "the little infants and the big infants." They had them in one room. It was a, schoolhouse had, the boys and the girls were separated. There was three rooms for classes for the boys and there was three rooms for classes for the girls. And they were taught by mostly women teachers. But in my, in the boy's school, for the younger set they had a woman teacher. I remember my first day which I went to school there, every bit that happened that day. SIGRIST: What, what sticks out in your mind about the first day of school? HENDERSON: I wouldn't sit at my desk, the desk I was, there'd by two at a desk. And I wouldn't sit in the desk, so she chased me all around the room. And she was wearing those hobble skirts at the time and she, I could get through the desks much faster than her because I was small and skinny. And I was running. So she couldn't do anything with me, so she went out and brought in the principal. He was there in the third room. And he come and he sized up the situation and he took a bigger boy than me and he sent him down to the town, to the town, to the candy, where they sold candy. He gave him some money. And the boy brought back the candy. And he put, he showed me the candy and he put them on this desk and he put me in this desk with this boy and we had a lovely time between us eating the candy. No problem for the rest of them day. (they laugh) SIGRIST: Did you like school when you were growing up? HENDERSON: Oh, I loved school. My greatest love was math. I like mathematics. But I never went very far in it, but I like math. SIGRIST: Was your, was your grandmother, I'm assuming your grandmother was really the biggest influence on you at this point. HENDERSON: She would have been, yes, or, or what I call my "aunt," the lady my uncle married. SIGRIST: Was education important to your family? HENDERSON: Oh, yes, because we had to be educated, that we knew from the very beginning that we had to go to America. SIGRIST: Was your grandmother able to read and write? HENDERSON: Oh, yes, very good. SIGRIST: So the women were educated as well as the men in your family. HENDERSON: Yes. And she knew something about education because in Ireland, before I went to school, we had to write with a, I had nothing to write with, only a slate pencil. It was a thing you, you write on the slate. You take a slate and you put that. And when she saw the figures I made and how I wrote them and how I formed them, she tackled up the donkey and cart and drove into town and bought me a book and a pencil. (he is moved) So I was able to write when I went to school. So she knew that it was important to be educated. SIGRIST: Sure. That shows the importance that she... HENDERSON: If there was anything extra being taught in town, I had to go in and learn it. SIGRIST: Do you have any recollections of how your family might have been affected by World War One? HENDERSON: (not hearing Mr. Sigrist) Let me get the... SIGRIST: Was your family affected in any way by the First World War, that you can remember? HENDERSON: Yes. Of course, there was a scarcity. I remember very well that the bread was very black instead of a white, nice loaf of bread. It was very black. The processing was, had (fast?), it turned out. And, I'm trying to think of the, the food, yeah, the food was rationed, of course, because it was, in the World War. But we were always able to get enough, even with the rationing, enough to keep hunger away. SIGRIST: Did any of your family members have to serve during the war? HENDERSON: Uh, no, because we were all under age at that time. SIGRIST: What about your father? HENDERSON: No, my father, he was probably old, too old for the service at that time. No, he didn't have to serve. SIGRIST: I see. Did you see your father much while you were living with your grandmother? HENDERSON: In my latter years, before I came to America, I saw quite a lot of him. SIGRIST: What was he doing during this time? HENDERSON: He went into the building business, building trades. He had a, he knew all about buildings. In fact, some of those people knew so much about buildings they could build a house, put the key in the door, put the lock on, put everything, different tradesmen, yeah. SIGRIST: And he was like that? He had that facility? HENDERSON: He was, yeah, very handy. SIGRIST: Was he in the same town as, as his business had been in before or did he move away somewhere? HENDERSON: No, he moved closer to where he came from. It's only a couple of miles away, yeah, a short distance. SIGRIST: Did he get along with your grandmother? HENDERSON: Not very well. (he laughs) Well, they got along, such as it was, yeah. But... SIGRIST: They tolerated each other. HENDERSON: But, see, they were different people. One side was the Holohans. The other side was the Hendersons. They were two different (?) all together. (he laughs) SIGRIST: (he laughs) So your, your mother is in America. You're growing up with your grandmother. What did you know about your mother while you were growing up with your grandmother? HENDERSON: I had a slight picture of her in my mind, of course. I didn't, I was too young when I was taken out there but I had a slight picture of her in my mind, yeah. SIGRIST: Did she ever write to you? HENDERSON: Oh, yes. SIGRIST: What did she tell you about things in America? HENDERSON: Well, the, I got a, the first gift I got from there was a silk handkerchief and a pair of sandals. But sandals was very poor on the farm because when they cut the corn, the sandals was cutting my feet. (he laughs) Otherwise, it was nice but silk handkerchief, silk was something new for me to have, a silk handerkerchief from America. SIGRIST: These very impractical gifts, you know, she'd sending you. HENDERSON: Yeah, yeah, for one that lived on a farm, yeah. SIGRIST: Did you have any, before you got to America, did you have any preconceived notions of what America was going to be like? HENDERSON: Oh, I, yeah. What I always thought of America is when I go there I'd be in a nice office and just sitting down doing nothing. (he laughs) SIGRIST: And it probably didn't work out quite like that. HENDERSON: Oh, no, no, not when I went to work. (Mr. Sigrist laughs) SIGRIST: When was it that, that you were getting ready to come to America? How old were you and what was that process like? HENDERSON: Well, when my mother wrote that she was bringing, bringing us out here, the last of the family, bringing out... SIGRIST: Were you the last of the family to go? HENDERSON: My sister and me, yeah. We were the last of the family. The others were already here. Of course, we had to prepare, go to the tailor and have a nice suit made up to at least look respectable when we landed. But the suit was made of material that your chauffeurs would wear here, a gray material. I often see it in chauffeurs here. And I, they, it was the knickers. And after arriving here with the short pants, my mother took me out to a tailor to get a long, a pair of long pants. And we tried to eradicate this mark they gave me in Ellis Island but it never came out of the material, so I only wore it for a short while. (he laughs) SIGRIST: How did you feel about leaving your grandmother and, and the life that you had? HENDERSON: My grandmother had passed away before I come out here. SIGRIST: I see. How many, how many years before or...? HENDERSON: Just a year, yeah. SIGRIST: So not that long. HENDERSON: I think that's why my mother decided to bring us out here, yeah. SIGRIST: How, I'm just curious, how did your grandmother feel about, about all her grandchildren, you know, one by one being sent over to America? HENDERSON: Well, I guess she knew that would happen at, all the time. But she had died before the last one, I was the last one looking after her, taking care of her. SIGRIST: Had your grandmother ever been to America or...? HENDERSON: No, but she seemed to know more about it. She had an instinct from the different relatives. She had several relatives here in America, and so she knew. She always worried about what happened to her sister. She used to say, "I don't know. I don't hear from my sister in Poughkeepsie." But later I found out, when I was here and in Poughkeepsie, her sister had married a, an owner of a hotel in Poughkeepsie and she had died. And that's why my grandmother probably was wondering why she wasn't hearing from her. But that story I heard when I got here. SIGRIST: Sure. Your grandmother didn't even know that she had passed away. HENDERSON: She didn't know she had passed away. SIGRIST: Can you tell me what luggage that you took? How much, did you take a suitcase or did you have a whole bunch of luggage? HENDERSON: The suitcase I had probably had very little in it because we were told that when we reached America, I'd have everything I wanted. And when I got down to Queenstown, of course, the, the American government had a place there where they process the immigrants before they got on the boat. And what I had in my, this very small case I had, probably it might have had two shirts in there to the most. We didn't have even underwear, we didn't wear it in Ireland, just long, heavy shirts. And I had my suit on me and maybe a tie in there and I had, someone had given me a gift of a new pair of shoes, so I had a new pair of shoes. (he laughs) So, the hotels were in with the shipping company and they knew, they sent you right down to the American where you had to pass a test. I went down there and there was a terrific mob there, just like there was trying to get over here to see Ellis Island. And it was so crowded and they were so rowdy that one of the medical officers there came out and he said, "Clear the hall." And I was the first to obey him and left the hall. And he came out a side door and he grabbed a hold of the first couple of people to leave and brought us in a side door. Now, he said, "You were the first to leave. You're going to be the first to leave here." Me. He brought us in and, of course, we had to have the case with us. So he looked in the case and he had to okay the clothing, that it was clean. He passed me on that. He passed me on everything, only the eye test. I had a stigmatism of the right eye. And he told me to come back on Sunday and see the eye doctor, not to come through the regular procedure but to the eye doctor. He gave me a red ticket, which I had to see the barber. He looked through my hair and, see, he gave me this red ticket. Now, when you presented the red ticket at the barber, the barber gave you a G.I. haircut, took everything off. No problem. (he laughs) So I didn't have to get a haircut in America for about two months. SIGRIST: (he laughs) We're going to pause for a second and Peter is going to flip the tapes over and we'll get you on the ship and we'll get you to America. So just hang on for a second... END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO SIGRIST: All right, we are now continuing with Patrick Henderson. So you've got your haircut and you're all inspected and everything. HENDERSON: Yeah, no problem. SIGRIST: How long did you stay in Queenstown before you got on the ship? HENDERSON: I had to be there, I think I was there for about three days because we had to get a visa [he pronounces it "vee-zee"] and the visa was only given, you had to have a reference from a clergyman and a businessman in town. You had to have two references from the town in which you were born. And you had to had a letter from the one that, from my mother, which was going to claim us. And that was presented at the consulate and then they issued the visa. SIGRIST: Are you traveling alone or did you say you had a sister... HENDERSON: I was traveling, a friend of my mother's was with us. SIGRIST: A friend of your mother's. HENDERSON: Yeah, she... SIGRIST: That was going to be going to America anyway? HENDERSON: She had been in America for many year but she hadn't been a citizen. So, of course, she took us. We, we, she had to go down to the Board of Health just the same as I had. She had to go through the same process. The only difference in what, what we went through, this man was very nice to us because we cleared the hall. I went down later, about five hours later, and they were putting them through the showers. And they were screaming. They were going through cold showers inside, every one of those people that was raising this rumpus in the hall. SIGRIST: See, it pays to follow directions. (he laughs) HENDERSON: Of course. I've learned that. SIGRIST: What the ship that you took, the name of the ship? HENDERSON: It was the President Adams. SIGRIST: And can you, can you recall actually getting on the ship? HENDERSON: I can recall before we got on, when we went out on the tender to the boat. It stayed out at the ocean and we had to take a tender out. One fellow says, "I think we should stay on the one we're on," the ship was so small. (he laughs) Yes, I remember when I got on board. They gave, they had a beautiful meal ready for us. So we all sat down and enjoyed this lovely meal. It was very good. And then after that, when that boat started moving, everybody got seasick. They weren't ready for a meal for a long time. (he laughs) They didn't have to serve another meal. SIGRIST: And you said the President Adams was a small ship. HENDERSON: It was. It was the United States Line. It was a, a ship that was captured in World War One from the Germans, yeah. SIGRIST: Oh, and then had been converted. HENDERSON: Converted, yeah. SIGRIST: Tell me where you slept on the ship. HENDERSON: Oh, I had a, I could say that the berth was nice. There was a, four, one on top of one another, and I was in the upper berth. It was very nice. SIGRIST: And do you remember how long the crossing took? HENDERSON: Yes. I, I left there on August 27th, which was Monday, and I arrived in at Hoboken [New Jersey] on Labor Day the following Monday. SIGRIST: What sticks out in your mind about being on the ship? Anything impress... HENDERSON: Oh... SIGRIST: Is there a story about something that might have happened while you were you were on the ship? HENDERSON: I'm trying to think, yeah. Yeah, it was, it was an interesting trip all right. SIGRIST: Mostly Irish people on the ship? HENDERSON: Yeah, English people as well as Irish. SIGRIST: English and Irish. HENDERSON: They got on at Liverpool. They were mostly all English speaking people on there, on this boat. I'm trying to think. Of course, there was church services on the ship. They had priests traveling second and third (correcting himself), on first and second class. And we had church service during our trip. And it was, it was, oh, yes, I do remember, after all the sickness on the boat I, I felt better. I felt good and everybody else in where I was felt terrible. They were still seasick. And I told them, "I'll go in the dining room this evening. I think I'll be able to eat, no problem." And when I went in, the waiter gave me a look. I was the only one in the dining room. (he laughs) He gave me a look. And I was able to pick up some food and bring it back to the others because they weren't able to go there at all. SIGRIST: Do you remember how they treated the people who were seasick, what kind of medicine they gave them or...? HENDERSON: Oh, I don't think they got any kind of medicine at all, any kind of, there was no such thing as seasickness pills in them days, I don't think. The only thing they, most of them stayed at the side rails of the ship on, to be ready to get rid of...(he gestures, they laugh) SIGRIST: Do you remember seeing the Statue of Liberty when the ship came in? HENDERSON: Uh, at first I remember coming in by a wooded area. I don't know where I was. It might be Jersey [i.e. New Jersey], along the shoreline. And later, of course, I remember seeing the Statue of Liberty before they pulled into Hoboken. That I remember very well. Of course, they, everyone is impressed by the Statue of Liberty, especially if they've heard anything about it. Most of America I had heard about from my oldest brother, which had traveled back and told us quite a lot about it. In fact, he described the houses to be, the buildings to be so large, in our mind, that even when I looked at them they were even smaller than I thought they were. SIGRIST: You had imagined them to be even bigger. HENDERSON: Now, we pulled into Hoboken and there was a band down there to play, "Yes, We Got No More..," (correcting himself), "Yes, We Got No Bananas." That was the tune they played for us when they came down to the dock. But we were kept there because there was no room for us in Ellis Island. We had to wait there. But I liked that because we got wonderful food. It was brought into the ship from the outside in Hoboken. And, besides that, our relatives, when they came to see us, we set up a rope line between the ship and the dock and we would send them out our dirty laundry and they would send us in the goodies they brought us. We were, I was wishing it would never end. SIGRIST: How long were you kept on the ship before you were brought to Ellis Island? HENDERSON: Seven days. We were all... SIGRIST: That's a long time. HENDERSON: The Monday we landed, and the following Monday morning, early, the Ellis Island ferry come over and picked us up, early. We just had finished breakfast when they took us to Ellis Island. SIGRIST: Tell me what you remember about going to Ellis Island and what happened there. HENDERSON: Oh, I, I enjoyed the trip across. The people who were going to work from Jersey, they were going in, in boats across and they were waving to us and shouting at us because they knew we were all new immigrants. That I remember. And I remember when I arrived in Ellis Island. I remember exactly everything that happened from the time I landed on Ellis Island. SIGRIST: Oh, well, why don't you tell us what you remember. HENDERSON: Yes. I remember when we got off that there was a, one of the representatives there, he was counting the boatload. And he would count to a certain number and when he got to that number he would give them a chalk mark on their jacket. And when you went further on the line we had, the fellow, there was another man. And when he saw the chalk marks, he pulled the chalk marked people out. I was one of them. And we were ushered into a room, and I haven't seen as many doctors around me since as I saw that day. We were stripped naked. They put men in one area and the women that was pulled out in another area. We were stripped naked and the doctors come around, each one examining different parts of it. So I got an "okay." And the boat, though, they was praying that we would pass because if we didn't pass the entire boatload might be held over if we had anything contagious. So we got through with flying colors, no problem. I remember then we were brought into that large hall, which I've seen today. I knew I'd see that thing again sometime. (they laugh) And we were seated there. There were different nationalities. There was English speaking people in one area, German speaking people in another area and I didn't know, there, it was the biggest hall I'd ever been in. And I saw that hall emptying, everyone taken out of there and the only one left, everybody had left, only my sister and myself. So I was wondering. I was sitting there wondering what had happened and finally I said to my sister, "Well, I'm going to see what's going on here. We're left here all alone and we're here quite a while." Oh, yes, I got up to look around. This big, burly guy in the back, I don't know where his voice is, he comes, he says, "Sit down there you." Well, I sat down very quietly. I was afraid to move after that. And I was sitting there for about an hour and finally a fellow, a dressed-up gentleman come in and he went to one of those desks. He opened up some papers and he called out our names. So we went up. He, I know one of the questions he asked was, "Have you got any money with you? How much money have you got on you?" And I had just in my pocket five shillings. And my brother, when he was back, had told me, he said, "In America, they're all crooks." (he laughs) I remember that. I said, "Now, this fellow wants my five shillings." So I told him, "I have no money." I said, I lied right away (he laughs) because I didn't want him to get what I had in my pocket. So, he said, after he signed every, filled in the form, he had to ask us the different questions when he filled them in. He said, "Now you go down, the two of you go down downstairs," he gave me directions, "you go downstairs," he says. And I, I didn't know. I went down, so I got lost. And I was, I found myself out amongst a bunch of immigrants that were speaking Italian, as far as I understand. And this lady knew we were lost and she knew she couldn't communicate with us, so she grabbed us both hands, my sister in one hand and me in the other, and she took us to a door. She opened that door and inside the door was this large colored man, which took us, the two of us, and opened a cage and put us in this cage. Well, I felt at home there because there was three, a couple of people that I knew on the boat were in there also. So I figured we're in a good place. We're all right. And they called everybody out of that cage then and took them to another cage but we were left alone then, when it was almost empty. So we were there a while. See, my mother had to come across from New York and she had heard it was late and she got over late, and my oldest brother. So, after a while we were called. This man that was taking care of the cage, he come over and he, he locked us. He made sure it was locked, that we weren't going to escape or go out anywhere. So, he opened the lock and he took us out and he took us down by another cage. He opened that and he locked that again. And then we could see our mother across at a desk claiming us. They asked her certain questions and then they come over and asked us the same questions to make sure that we were with the proper people. Now, we were all okay then. Then he let us out of the cage and we joined our mother and our oldest brother. SIGRIST: What, what did you think when you saw your mother? I mean, you haven't... HENDERSON: Well, it was quite a big, uh, surprising, it was really a, a big day. SIGRIST: What did she look like? Can you describe for me the woman that you saw that was your mother? HENDERSON: Yes, yes. She was a small, little woman with a nose like, just like mine, and features. And very business like. SIGRIST: And is that how you greeted each other? was she, was she... HENDERSON: Oh, she greeted us, oh, that she hadn't seen us in so long, since we were babies. We were young, small. And she just grabbed a hold of us, of course, like any mother would, yeah. That I'll never forget. SIGRIST: Did you leave Ellis Island with your mother or did you have to stay there...? HENDERSON: My brother, my brother took my case right away, the suitcase. And we left on the ferry for Staten Island (correcting himself), not Staten Island but for New York. And we boarded the elevator [i.e. elevated] train there and I didn't know we were boarding an elevator train until I looked out the window and I saw the people down below. But my thoughts were, I thought the stores were built down below. I thought I was riding on a level surface. I never seen a train that runs in the air. So I said to my brother, "I'm looking out here and the people are all on underground." I said, "What do they do here?" And he said, "No," he said, "you're up in the air. The people are downstairs, the people downstairs, what you see is they're down on the level." Now, my biggest problem was when we got off of the elevated at 116th Street on 8th Avenue. They lived in 118th Street on 8th Avenue, in the middle of Harlem in them days. It was a very beautiful area. And when we got off of the train, they had to go to the back to an elevator to take us down. But I thought they were taking us back for to get some drinks. They were going to get some nice drinks, because I thought it was a little snug in the back where you were served liquor. And I go into this thing and then this colored operator got on and he pulled, it was a cable car, and he pulled the cable. Oh, I thought the floor fell from under me. I didn't know it was an elevator. (he laughs) First elevator I was on. So we got down in the street level and then they took us to their apart--, where they were living. They were living up on the third floor of an apartment house. And my brother pressed the bell. Well, I had seen electric bells that you press. And he said, "There's somebody home." I said, "How do you know? Nobody came down to this door." "Oh," he said, "there's somebody in the house." He says, he says, "They let us in." "I didn't see anybody here," I said. I didn't know that it was answered by a buzzer in the apartment. (he laughs) So I was learning. SIGRIST: Tell me a little bit about the apartment and what it looked like. HENDERSON: The apartment was, I would say, like a railroad flat with about a kitchen, dining room, two bedrooms and a front, living room in the front. And a corridor which you walked through to get from, say you're walking from the kitchen to the living room. SIGRIST: Did you have electricity in the apartment? HENDERSON: They were just putting in electricity, about a week after I arrived there. And they were also putting in steam heat. SIGRIST: What do you remember about the process of them installing the electricity and the steam heat? HENDERSON: Well, I saw the, I was watching them installing the various things. Electric was really new to a lot of people. We had friends that would come up there just to see how, what electricity was like, and steam heat, because they were accustomed to the gaslight. When I went in there first, the gaslight, they had the gaslight. And, uh, my best memory was, a, a few days after I was there my mother was going out to the store and she took my sister with her. She was buying her some things. And she says, now, I was reading something and she come in and she said to me, she said, "Listen, I'm going to the store." And she says, "The iceman will come and he'll put ice on the dumbwaiter. And you take it off and put it in the icebox." It was all Greek to me. I started repeated this in my mind after she had left. And I says, "What did she say? She says about ice? And she said she would put a quarter, she left money on the table. 'I left money on the table, which you put on the dumbwaiter for the iceman.'" When I, when the buzzer rang, I opened every door in the house because I'm looking for this thing she called the dumbwaiter. So finally I opened the right one and I saw this dumbwaiter and I saw this cake of ice. I took the cake of ice off and put it on the kitchen table. I didn't know anything about an icebox. I left it there on the table, and the fellow was still ringing. I said, "This must be what he's ringing for, the money." So I put the money on and then the thing, he pulled the thing down. I went in and continued reading, left the ice on the table melting (he laughs) 'til they got back home. (he laughs) There was, there was still some ice there. (he laughs) SIGRIST: Your mother must have been a little unhappy with you. HENDERSON: Oh, she probably was irritated but she didn't say so. SIGRIST: (he laughs) Were you expected to get a job right away? HENDERSON: As soon as they had it in shape to walk us around and, oh, I remember my brother taking me out the first Saturday I was in the country. And I was dodging in and out of cars, which I wasn't used to that kind of traffic. And then it was mostly cabs, you know. I was scared even crossing the street. I used to, when I'd be alone I would just walk around the block. It was a triangle block where they met three, two avenues and the street met together and I'd just walk around that triangle and, so I couldn't get lost, you know, and get back to the door. Yeah, it was, uh, first Saturday we went out walking with them and we walked a long distance. I guess we walked about from 118st Street down to a friend that was in the 70s to see him. And I'll tell you, it was a scary walk for me because I had never been through that kind of traffic before as I had in New York. SIGRIST: There's just a new discovery around every corner for you. HENDERSON: Yeah. SIGRIST: How long was it before you did get a job? HENDERSON: I arrived in September and I had a job in October, early in October. SIGRIST: What was the first job that you got? HENDERSON: My first job was in the Underwood Typewriter Company. SIGRIST: The Underwood Typewriter... HENDERSON: My job was a parts boy. SIGRIST: How did you get the job? HENDERSON: We, we went out, my mother saw the ads in the paper and we went out. The first job I didn't get hired in. And the second one, she took me down to Vesey Street where the Underwood Typewriter Company was. There was a, they needed a boy there. So I was interviewed by a gentleman there and he took me right on. So I was to work in a couple of days. He set the date for me to come into work. I'll never forget my first day going to work. I had to travel alone down on that elevator. I found the place because I remembered from the trip with my mother. She made me remember where I was. And I had to go up to the office and he took me to where I was to work. I was work--, I worked, they had a foreign department there repairing typewriters and the mechanics in there spoke different languages. There was a few speaking English and some of them understood English but they didn't speak it. And my job was to go down to the stock room, see, they couldn't waste the time with the mechanics, go down to the stock room and get whatever they ordered and put it on their order sheet, bring it up to them and put it at their bench. That was my first job. I got twelve dollars a week for that. That was very good and I didn't only have to work a half day on Saturday. SIGRIST: Now, were you expected to give your mother that money for the household? HENDERSON: Of course. My mother got all the money and she dished me out just what I would need... SIGRIST: Do you remember how you to, to... HENDERSON: ...to live on for the week. And I had to be very frugal with that money. I couldn't spend it anywhere I wanted to. (he laughs) I had to spend it on what it was issued for. SIGRIST: Now, how long did you stay at that job? HENDERSON: Oh, I guess I stayed there about a year, a year or maybe a little more than a year, yeah, at that particular job. I got a job with a bank as a junior clerk, yeah. SIGRIST: That was the second job that you got? HENDERSON: Second job, yeah. SIGRIST: Yeah. Well, that must have been a step up for you? HENDERSON: First, first a page and then a junior clerk. A junior clerk, at that time, I think I was the highest paid junior clerk. I got about seventy eight dollars but I got a beautiful meal every day waited with waiters in the bank. They had a, a dining area. SIGRIST: What bank was it? HENDERSON: It was called, at that time, the Guarantee Trust. Now it's the Guarantee Morgan, yeah. SIGRIST: Were you in communication with your father in Ireland at all during any of this. HENDERSON: Uh, we, we did have communication, of course. My oldest brother used to make the, my brother used to make the contacts mostly with my father, yeah. SIGRIST: Tell me about what, in, in that first year in America, what you did for fun? What did you do for entertainment? HENDERSON: Oh, yeah. I'm trying to think. Sometimes my brother would take me out, my oldest brother would take me out to a movie on Sunday. That was quite a thrill. We, we did have movies in Ireland once in a while when they'd come into town but he took me out on Sundays, the Loew's Theatres there in 125th Street. That was the Broadway of the uptown area. It was a very classy area, and there were several movie spots there. I do remember my first haircut, though. Of course, I told you I didn't need it for a couple of months. But this fellow put me in the chair and he must have known I was still a greenhorn. So he gave me everything there was for a haircut and it cost me $1.32. At that time, you could get a haircut for about thirty five cents. So the next day was Sunday and I said to my mother, "I need some money," and we were going to church. My mother says, "What do you need the money for?" I said, "I need it for to go to church." She said, "Didn't I give you money yesterday?" I said, "Yeah, but that barber took a $1.32." She took me by the hand and she took up by the barber. He was open on holidays then. He saw her coming. He went to the register and (he got scared?) just he gave her difference between the haircut and I got everything for nothing. (he laughs) SIGRIST: That makes me think, did you ever experience any kind of prejudice because you were an immigrant... HENDERSON: Oh, no prejudice at all. SIGRIST: ...or any kind... HENDERSON: There was every race of people there. There was all, in one area there was Jewish people living all along 110th Street in the area. There was no prejudice. There was doctors living along there in front of Central Park, beautiful area. I palled around when I got older with people from Norway, Norwegians that I got to know. I've got to say there wasn't any prejudice of any type whatsoever. And there was even our, what do you call them, our superintendent, our manager, our janitor, as they called them in the day, was a black woman. And when she was ill, my mother took her down soup to make up for, to take care of her while she was sick. And one thing, in them days, we made all our own firewood. We went out and got crates and wood and stored the, stored the firewood away in the basement. We had a locker where you stored your firewood for the stove. And it was a big day when my mother went out and got a gas stove from the gas company. And the biggest day was when they went down to get her a victrola in Wanamaker's [Department Store]. I think most of them went down there. I didn't happen to go with them, but they went down there to pick up a victrola at Wanamaker's. SIGRIST: Is that, was that sort of a symbol of "making it," when you, when you... HENDERSON: Yeah, you were getting up in the world. We were all working and making a little more money. And everybody was getting happier and happier by the days, yeah. SIGRIST: And so to buy the victrola was a major purchase, probably. HENDERSON: Oh, yeah. That was a big purchase. SIGRIST: What, what kind of music did your mother like back then? HENDERSON: Huh? SIGRIST: What kind of music did your mother like? HENDERSON: Well, of course, Irish music, being Irish born. SIGRIST: And you could purchase... HENDERSON: And then, any one of us would go out every so often and everyone would bring in another record, or another record, when they had a little money over. McCormick [John McCormick] was the big singer in those days. And, and I don't think if they had any records, of course Caruso [Enrico Caruso] was still in them days. But I think they had music by Fritz Kreisler, the violinist. But they had very nice music. SIGRIST: And so your, you had classical music in the house. HENDERSON: That was a treat. We'd go into the living room, turn on the victrola. You had to wind it by hand. "His Master's Voice." (they laugh) With the records stored in the cabinet underneath. SIGRIST: Did your mother ever want to go back to Ireland? HENDERSON: No, no, I don't think she did but, uh, I come in '23 and my brother died, my oldest brother died in 1925. SIGRIST: Oh, soon after... HENDERSON: Yeah, yeah. SIGRIST: ...you got here. What did he die of? HENDERSON: Uh, today it would be curable. Acute, acute (efeetus [ph], perhaps nephritis?), kidney disorder, and they had no cure for it in them days. Today they have the dialysis. SIGRIST: Can you talk a little bit about him being sick and, and when he died? HENDERSON: Oh, yes. They took him. Of course, first they thought the illness, he went to a rest home up in the country for a while, hospital and rest home. Then he came back and they put him in a hospital in the Bronx. I think they called it St. Joseph's Hospital. And he didn't like it. He wanted to come home. And after they brought him home, it was Saturday, he died about a couple a days after, home there. They had a doctor in to try and ease the pain, to give him something to ease the pain. SIGRIST: And, of course, he's the one family member that has been with your mother since she came to this country. HENDERSON: Ah yes, since she initially, yeah. SIGRIST: Did she take it very hard? HENDERSON: Very, very hard, yeah, because he was the oldest boy, yeah. And the, I'm thinking of the year after, 19--, he died in 1925 and she died in 1926, in the fall of 1926. She had a, got a, I'm trying to think of what happened to her, at first it was fallen arches and we used to walk her out in the air. We'd always be, some of us, with her. And then, later, she discovered, it was very late when some young doctor in Roosevelt Hospital discovered that she had a, a blood disorder, pernicious anemia. And at that time there was no cure for it. We did give some blood. My, one of my sisters, we all had to go to be checked for our blood to see, to see if we had the type, her type. But one of my sisters had the closest and they gave her that. And I believe what happened was it clotted. They didn't know enough in them days to give the proper type of blood. It clotted and she, she had (a nice?), that she died very easy, no problem then. It was, just went in to see her that morning, and it was a Friday, on our way to work. And I just got down to my job when I got a call that she had passed away, that she had, was passing away, that she was dying. I rushed up there and I was there just when she died, yeah. SIGRIST: We're going to be ending in just a minute. I want to ask you one final question. Are you glad that the decision was made for you to come to this country and that you actually did come here? HENDERSON: Oh, yes. Right now, when I looked back at it all, I think, even though I went through a rough time in the Depression and the good times after that made up for it all, I, I think that the entire family made out much better in America than they would have done in Ireland. By far they couldn't have had what they had here, not the living conditions and the food and the, and everything else, the same as we have here. SIGRIST: Mr. Henderson, I want to thank you very much for taking time out from your visit. You said you came from California. HENDERSON: It was a pleasure talking to you. SIGRIST: Good. This is, this is Paul Sigrist signing off with Patrick Henderson on Sunday, August 7th, 1994 here at Ellis Island. Thank you. 