LEVINE: This is Janet Levine for the National Park Service, and I'm here today with Gilda Gochman Huber Hochman. HOCHMAN: Gilda Gochman. LEVINE: Gochman. HOCHMAN: Gilda Gochman Huber Hochman. LEVINE: Hochman, okay. And we're here in Hollywood, Florida. It's Friday, May 8th, 1992 and Gilda came from the U.S.S.R. via Southampton, England, when she was eleven years old, in 1920. HOCHMAN: They left on Talnoe, yeah. They left the town of Talnoe. LEVINE: Talnoe. Okay. Well, why don't we start out by saying your birth date. HOCHMAN: Yes. Okay. I was born, it's an interesting thing, because we never knew our birth date because we were robbed of our birth certificates. That's one of the things that as we travel I'll be telling you about our trip coming out of the U.S.S.R., getting over towards Roumania, towards Bessarabia, Moldavia. We were held up on the road and everything was taken from us. And my mother had our birth certificates and family photographs, and that's all she had, memorabilia of the family. And they were undressing all the men and the women and getting anything that they had tied to them. They were robbers. These were the Cossacks, robbers on the road. And they were taking everything from everyone. My mother saw a bush, and she took this pillowslip, and she thought when they go away I'll go and get, at least I will have these things to bring to America. LEVINE: Hmm. So your birth certificates were taken at that time. HOCHMAN: So then they followed us for about ten miles, and we never were able to go back and pick the thing out. So we never had, my mother tried by the Jewish calendar, to tell when we were registered in school, we were born around this and this date, but none of us really knew the exact date of birth to this day. LEVINE: Okay. Now what town were you born in? HOCHMAN: I was born in a town called, we called it Tulnar, but it's Talnoe. LEVINE: T-A-L . . . HOCHMAN: N-O-E, on the map. And it's still on the map. LEVINE: Okay. Now, how long did you live in Talnoe. HOCHMAN: Until I was eleven. I was born there. LEVINE: Okay. Well, maybe you can describe what . . . HOCHMAN: I was born there with my family and my brothers and sisters. We all were born there in that town. LEVINE: Why don't you first describe your family? Your mother, her maiden name. HOCHMAN: My mother was Molly Goldberg Gochman. She had brothers and sisters who eventually little by little got out and went to America, and some remained. Her sister who remained was killed in the next town. The orphans of the family, five of them, came to live with us until we brought them to America with us. And my mother and father married them like they were their own children, and there's one of them left from that family. My cousin Aline who lives in Sunrise, and she's like my sister. Her sister, her last sister died this past year and we were at her funeral and so on. LEVINE: And now how about your father? What was his name? HOCHMAN: My father was Edward Gochman. LEVINE: And did you have brothers and sisters? HOCHMAN: I had, yes. I had four brothers and five sisters. We were six sisters. LEVINE: Oh, wow. Okay. And you all . . . HOCHMAN: We're four sisters left. My four brothers have all gone. And my two, um, my two sisters died. My one sister died in October, and the other one died six years ago. So there are four sisters left now. I have the twins, Bernice and Anne, my youngest. I'm eight years older than my twins, and there's one in between, Vivian. And she lives in Damia. She also has a second husband. Her husband is alive, her second husband. And she, and my sister Bernice is the only one who has the original husband, of all of the sisters, and they live in California now. She's one of the twins. LEVINE: Okay. HOCHMAN: And her name is Righthand. Bernice Righthand. She's married to Herb Righthand. He was just eighty years old. LEVINE: Okay. Well, why don't you describe that town? HOCHMAN: Oh, it was a beautiful, it was a most picturesque town, as I remember it as a child. The parks were an unbelievable sight. The streets were wide, the boulevards were magnificent and the poor, the poor peasants, this was under the czar as I remember it when I was a child, would sit. There was a, the town was divided by a river, and there was a bridge. We lived on one side of the bridge and the main town was on the other side. ( telephone rings ) Excuse me. ( break in tape ) LEVINE: We're resuming now after a telephone call. HOCHMAN: ( she laughs ) A short pause. LEVINE: A short pause. Okay, so there was a bridge that divided . . . HOCHMAN: The bridge that divided, we lived on one side, as I said, and the other side. And when we crossed it, we were on the suburban side of the town. And the middle of the town, there was a marketplace on one side, and on the other was a tremendous church with a red brick wall and I remember seeing as a child, seeing the peasants sitting and begging. They were beggars on the, sitting against the wall. So there were poor people. The, as I remember it as a Jewish person, I remember my mother and father working. My father was a fisherman. My grandfather was, he was also, but he was an older man at that point, as I remember him. And he was my favorite human being in the world. LEVINE: Why was he your favorite? HOCHMAN: He looked like Santa Claus. He had a white beard and he was over six feet tall. And he was home. He used to do the nets. He used to fix the nets from the fishery when they were torn. They were brought on the wagons to our town from the lakes where they, my father used to go with some men where they would plant the fish in one area and they would grow and the seedlings of the fish, and then in the spring they would come and get them, and my grandfather was home. My father was away all week, and Friday he would come home late at night, towards evening, not late at night. It had to be before sundown because on Friday my mother would light the candles. One of the things that I will never forget, when the, this is under the czar, as bad as the Bolsheviks or what they call Communists were described by people later on, I never, we never remembered being hurt by the Bolsheviks. Only by the Cossacks, and by the czarist regime. I remember my mother about to light her candles and she had a candelabra. We were not, that was the time during when the Revolution already started and my father wasn't able to, the fishing business had dwindled and he wasn't able to travel. He was afraid to travel. So my, we, there was evidently no money in the house to pay the tax. We had to pay the tax by the week. And as a child I must have been six years old. I saw my mother standing and crying for these police who came to get the tax, or take away this one thing that she had, a samovar, that we had. We were not rich people. And the samovar, and she had a candelabra. And she was about to put her candles into the candelabra when they came in, and she said she didn't have the money. I mean, from what I understood as a child, and they took the thing and walked out, and my mother stood there crying. The tears were just rolling down her cheeks, and I'll never forget it. And she turned around, went to the back, took some, a couple of potatoes. She cut them and cut them out and put the candles in the potatoes. I told this story to my children. My daughter did it this year. She lit candles on, when was it that she did, Hanukkah, and my daughter isn't exactly a pious religious person, but she never forgot the story I told her, and she said, "You know, I didn't have a candelabra, mother. And so I wanted to light the candles." And she took some potato and she lit it. And that was so touching to me. And when, that was a bad time. That was a bad time. Shortly after that those orphans came because they were, the killings took place because the Cossacks would be fighting. The two regimes would be fighting and the Cossacks were on the side of the regimes. They were fighting between and among themselves, also against the Bolsheviks. And the one incident that I had as a child being, that was the closest I ever came to getting killed directly. And I, my mother, it was a quiet morning, and my mother, we had everything taken away from us during those times. The Cossacks came, they took our samovar. We had some silverware, they took that away from us. No matter where you hid them, they would break walls, they would break anything. They knew exactly where people put things away and they would just take everything away. Well, that one morning, and they took out, we had some horses and we had a, I used to, as a little child I remember going, getting on the horse maybe four years old and going to the river to get the horse a drink, and it was a wonderful time as a child at that time, until things began to happen. Then when I came to, that time when, I remember this time my mother said to me, this one morning, gave me a pitcher with a handle, and she said, "We have no milk in the house. But go to the postman." He was a non- Jewish man, a very nice man in the neighborhood, and she said, "He still has his cows." Because they took the things away from the Jews, so we had none of these things left, and they still had those things. So she said, "I think that you'll be able to get this thing filled with milk." So I came in and there were a lot of people there waiting to get milk from him from the street. I waited and waited and I finally got this, and we started hearing voices. We were not far from the railroad. He lived nearer to the railroad than we. We lived about ten houses down. And as soon as we began to hear voices like that, we knew the voices came from what they call Prekura. He was a leader of the gang, the Cossacks, and Denekan. That was another one. And they were there to kill, to seduce, to kill, to destroy. And people, as they, and you never knew when they were coming. For a long time I didn't forgive my mother for sending me into this kind of thing when I was growing up. But she didn't know that they were coming, that anybody was coming. They had to hide. They began to hear this, and then machine guns started going on because they, the Bolsheviks had just begun to leave the town. They were in town, and they were following them. There were Germans going, there were Bolsheviks going. They were going from place to place and fighting each other. And as these guns started and these voices were coming, I ran out of there and I saw them at a distance, a short distance, these Cossacks had hats with a long extended tassels. And I already knew as a child that that's danger, and I began to run, but I didn't throw away the milk, I didn't drop it. I ran. I started going, and they sounded drunk, and they sounded, you know, by the tone of their voice, even as a child, I could tell it didn't sound right, and they were running, and they said, "There goes that little Jewish." And they started running after me. Two of them were running, and the rest of them were running anyway. They were all coming. They had to find out where the rest of the Jews were. And I just ran. Now, we had a front street and then we had a back alley. I ran around the alley and ran, and ran into my house on the back. There was no one there of the family. My grandfather was the only one sitting there. And he said, "Run to Brimbergs next door, and go to the back and go to their stall." There the people were hiding down in a cellar. So I ran, slid down a wall, and a man was standing by the door. I don't know how these things happened. They were just the miracles that were happening. And they took me in there. I got in, and I, the man said, "Go up there." There was a way of going inside of the stall, they had wood all the way up to the ceiling from the floor. And then we'd go up and then slide down, all the way down. And he got me up there and he came after me so that we can go down together. In the meantime, we heard the voices coming and they weren't coming through the back, they were coming through the front. And they were going to find out where the people were. They were following me. They saw me coming, and they saw me dropping, and they were following me. They saw me from the top. And they knew that where I was there must have been people like me somewhere. When I came down, I saw my brother, one of my brothers, my brother Henry, and the rest of the neighbors, but nobody else from my family. Each one went in a different direction. We never knew where and when we'd ever see each other again. So when I got there my brother hugged me and held me. Mr. Brimberg, the owner of the house, was sitting right next to my brother, and suddenly he, and these people, he's sitting next to me, and these people are banging at the door. They ripped the door open, and this was a solid place, this was, this man, they had a lovely place, they had horses and things at one time. There were no horses left any more or anything, but the stall was still there. And they opened the door, and they started running to see where is, where are those Jews, where are they. And they were just as drunk as they could be. They, as they looked they said, "You know, there is somebody there. They must be there somewhere. We have." They started throwing the wood down. Throwing, piece by piece, you could hear it going. And we knew we were doomed. He came, one of them came up to the top and Mr. Brimberg lit a cigarette at that time. And they were sure we were there. We wanted to kill him. You know how people kill? Well, we didn't kill him, but we wanted to. By some miracle, a whistle blew, and it meant that they were in trouble, and then you could hear the guns coming from another area getting them out of town. So they left, and we were saved then. That was one of the times that I could never get out of my mind for years and years and years and years And I still can't. LEVINE: Is that something you dreamed about too, as well? I mean, was it a kind of a nightmare recurring, or . . . HOCHMAN: I always saw myself running. I always saw myself running and running and running. It's been years that I don't dream too much any more, but it was a nightmarish kind of a, but that was one of the times. There were other times when we were, when our town was on fire. One time the Cossacks came in and they burned the town. We all ran from all our homes, and went into the temple. There was a Jewish temple, and the men were standing and praying with their prayer shawls, and the women were crying, and we children were standing around and not knowing what was happening to us. And then we saw, we could see there was a big structure, a structure there. The same spot where the church was, but this was in the back on the other side where the markets were, where the Jewish section was where the Jews were selling stuff. And there was a drug store, a building, a drug store. We could see from the sides the flames going, going. They were coming right towards us. And we never knew where it was going to end. Again a miracle, and there, it suddenly stopped. And then they ran out of town. And it was, I remember walking with my mother at dawn, walking over buttons, needles, broken, uh, things from the stores and, excuse me, I must get a tissue. I'll get this, it's okay. ( she wipes her eyes ) My mother took me by the hand, and took me to go back home because it was quiet once they were gone, to see what we can get from home, because we ran out leaving everything. There were some breads at home. There was some food at home we didn't have. So she took me and we went, we crossed the bridge and went over. There were so many things that were happening. The one incident, the day that I, I always want to forget that, I know. The day that I came in and brought the milk in and I started running to my neighbors, I looked out of the window. They were, this was the band of cossacks running. The woman in front of our house had a house and part of the house was a little grocery store. And she was our grocery lady. And she was pulled out of her grocery store and she was cut in half on the stone in the back. And this was the picture I took with me when I ran out. I always want to forget it and I, somehow it comes up again whenever I talk about these things. And then there was a man, our other neighbor on the side, who had his head chopped off that same day. He was running on the bridge, and one of them came with a saber and cut his head off. And these were things that were happening. And when I say miracles, the miracle of our family coming away and coming here intact is something that is unbelievable. LEVINE: How long a period of time was it that you, from the time you were born until these kinds of things started happening? HOCHMAN: When I was about, when my cousins came I was about eight years old. LEVINE: And before that it was a kind of idyllic town? ( clock chimes ) HOCHMAN: Oh, but the idyllic town, it wasn't idyllic. When we were, when we were living and working, as long as we were paying our taxes they let us alone, but when we weren't able to pay things got bad and the conditions generally got worse. They, we began to feel it more and more, and that's when the incident of the police coming in and taking the candelabra and so on, so that's how these things happened. LEVINE: I see, I see. HOCHMAN: And we left . . . LEVINE: Excuse me, were there a lot of Jews in town? HOCHMAN: Yes. We had two temples. We had a temple in the city and we had a temple on the side where we lived not far from us. We had one small temple, and then there was a large temple. Yes, there were many Jews in this town, yes. LEVINE: And the other people in the town were not being bothered? HOCHMAN: No, no. In fact, they reported Jews, they reported to the Cossacks where the Jews were, and many of them were killed. LEVINE: Now, did they have to pay taxes as well, the other people in the town? HOCHMAN: I don't, that, I don't know that answer. I really don't know that answer. It's a good question. I would like to be able to know, um, I'm trying to think of whom would I be able to ask at this point. My older brothers are gone, my sisters are gone, and I'm the oldest of them. And I cannot, I imagine that everybody had to pay taxes. LEVINE: On the other hand, when things got rough they were taking the Jewish people's things, but not other people's things. HOCHMAN: No. LEVINE: Horses, cows. HOCHMAN: No, no, no. They did not take theirs, no. In fact, they went to them to ask them where the Jews lived, and they would tell us. And there was a neighbor above us that loved my mother and loved us and my mother used to bake things and give to him. He was a drunk living above us on the hill. He reported a group of them, and they came in the middle of the night, and how my brother and I, they strung my grandfather up. There was a hook on the ceiling. They strung a rope up there and tied him, and put him around. Oh. I guess all these things that I don't want to remember come back because I'm in the, I'm there. And they were going to hang him, and my brother they were going to shoot in one corner, and another brother and my father in the other corner. And they, I jumped on this man that was going to pull the thing, and I scratched his face. I don't know what I did to him, but he let my grandfather down. And then my, then they, they left. So I don't, I don't know what, who, you know, I really am not a God-fearing person, or a God-believing person, but I don't know how these things happened. How that some people they were destroyed, were killed, as I told you, cut to pieces and seduced or what not. My older sister, um, was, had an experience that all of us knew that she was, she became very ill and as a result of that was ill all her life. Was depressed, a manic depressive. And she was a student and she was the only Jew in high school, was permitted in because she had the highest marks. She went to the university in the next town, in another city, Gingrotka was another city near Kiev. And she went to the university, and that's where she met her husband, and then they got married, and then they couldn't go or leave. When we left they had to leave by way of, they ended up in Mexico because they were married and they couldn't travel with us as a family, as children. But that's another part of the story. She was with a group of people one day, one of these times when all of these things were taking place, when the Cossacks came into town. Well they, there were some Jewish girls and Gentile girls all together in this school. And she, they were in one of the girl's houses. They were in uniform. They had just come back from school, and they were in this girl's house, about six of them. And this was in a park, near a park. They, the Cossacks turned up, they were, the girls came out. They were in this, the front of this house. The Cossacks began to chase them. My sister fell and one of them either seduced her or was close to it, and she was in shock all the rest of her life. She became a nurse in this country, she worked at times, but most of her life was wasted, and she was so brilliant. That's how she was affected. END OF SIDE ONE, TAPE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE LEVINE: Would you say there was a lot of anti-Semitism in the town? HOCHMAN: Oh, yes. LEVINE: In general? HOCHMAN: In general, in general. The Ukraine is known for its anti-Semitism to this day. It's known for its anti-Semitism. When my husband and I travelled to the Soviet Union, we were in Kiev. We saw, there was like a street with trees on it, and they had benches all over it, like a semi-park. We met some Jewish people sitting there. I saw one man reading a Jewish newspaper, and I could read the Jewish newspaper. And he was so happy to see us as Jews to say hello. And he said, and two men were playing chess and so on. He said, "We're doing all right." We asked him how they were coming along. "We're doing all right. It's quiet. There's nothing, you know, no pogroms now. It's fine." This was under the Soviets. It was only when Stalin came in that the things turned themselves around because I remember that, also as a child, when the Bolsheviks came into town, they would knock at our door. And if my mother was lucky enough my father got some flour and my mother made some bread so she'd have, ten, we were a big family with my cousins and all of that, living together, they would take a, they would say to my mother, "Hasaka, madam, we'll take some of these breads, we'll leave you a few, but we're hungry. We must run." And they would take some, take a sack and put the breads in. Take, say, like six, eight breads. My mother made a dozen, so they left some for us. That's what I remember then doing. But I didn't remember the Cossacks and those anti-Semites doing anything like that. So that's, those are all my memories of that. But when Stalin came in, that's when things got bad for the Jews. He really was a Hitler. LEVINE: Okay. Well, how about telling how the decision was made that your family would actually leave. HOCHMAN: Interesting. My Uncle Benny, the oldest of the brothers, had a son living in America. Some of them came early. My two brothers came with my aunts and uncles. One brother, this one, my two older brothers were not on these pictures where our family is coming from Roumania. My uncle, my cousin Harry was a union organizer in this country. And he belonged to the HIAS. He was chosen as one person to take, go to Talnoe to take the Jews out of Talnoe. He said, "I have my family. I want to take more than my family." He was going to go and get his family. So they had meetings. All the family people came. They got some money together and they said, "Here, you go. My brothers came. They said, "Here. We will hock everything we own. And we will give it to you. Get our parents out of there. Get our." My cousins that lived there with them, and they'd been through so much. "Get them out of there." So one fine day we found ourselves, we waited, and one fine day we got a letter that my cousin was in, uh, Bessarabia. He did not get into the Soviet Union, what was later the Soviet Union. He came and sent a letter to the family, to his family. My cousin, his sister, came to us and said that there is, we are getting together. There are going to be some wagons set up, and there will be three, two or three wagons of so many families that he's getting out of Talnoe. So one day we found ourselves doing this. And then we began to think, "What is going to happen to?" We had our little grandma living with us, my father's mother. And my mother's father had just died. But my grandma was still alive. She was an old lady. My uncle lived in the town, my uncle Benny, with his family and his children, but they always lived, no matter how many people we had, there was always room for more. And that's why when my sisters, my brothers, we always had open house for everybody. And to this day, this is the way we function. So we learned something. All of these tragedies helped us to survive, but more than that. It helped us realize that you have to be giving. ( she is moved ) ( she coughs ) May I get some water? ( break in tape ) LEVINE: Okay, we're resuming. You were saying that it helped you really stay close, or realize . . . HOCHMAN: Stay close, uh, realize that you must be, learn to live with people. You must be forgiving, because if you're not you won't exist. ( she pauses ) And, uh, that's the way we have been living. That's the way we were. And the quest for knowledge was embedded in us, learning. We must learn. One of the things in coming to this country, I felt that feeling of freedom. There were no more of those guns. For the longest time it was in my head. I could hear the machine guns going, going, going, going. It was a feeling of freedom that was beyond, I couldn't describe it. I couldn't describe what the feeling was. It was beyond my description. I couldn't know how to describe it. There was just a peace inside of me beginning, beginning because there was a lot of torment. But with that there was the beginning of, there was a hope. That's what I know, that's why I know what it was like for these blacks and for these Puerto Ricans and for these Mexicans and for these Koreans and all these people who are suffering. I can identify myself with them so easily and feel for them and know. And if they only learned to live with each other. Like King said, as broken up as he was and as dramatic it was for him to say it, he said, "Let's live together. We're here such a short time. We must learn to live with each other." Because there's a feeling of destruction all around the world. It's terrible. LEVINE: Did you have a long trip once you decided to leave? HOCHMAN: Yes. Well, we left, when we left we came, we came, it was slow moving because when we came to Kishinev, which was part of Moldivane, Moldavia, my mother had typhoid. That's where the picture was taken, after that, in Roumania, where she had to wear a wig, and she was very ill. She was hospitalized. And we lived in a place where most of us had to sleep on the floor, and we didn't have much money, and it was a partially furnished place and so on. There wasn't, we didn't travel deluxe first class, because we were on the bottom rung when we came, when we were on the ship, because there wasn't that much money sent for us to travel, but we went. LEVINE: There were several of you. How many . . . HOCHMAN: There were so many of us, of all of us. I mean, that whole group. But the going away, the day of going away, getting on those wagons there were three wagons going. Ours was the last wagon, and my little grandmother was left behind. I used to take her to the river every Friday. ( she is moved ) And I would put her on the little rock and I would wash her and she would bless me. She would say, "You will always be the happiest and the luckiest person in the world. God will bless you." ( she is moved ) And I had to say goodbye to my grandma. That was, when I said goodbye to my grandfather, I was destroyed when he died. Because I mourned with my mother. I sat there all day long. He died on a Friday night, and I sat with my mother and I cried for him. And this going away, seeing my grandma, and the little dog that we left behind. That was such a terrible time. But there were lots of terrible times. LEVINE: Did you ever hear from her after that? HOCHMAN: She died. My sister who came, who got married and came to Mexico, the one who I told you who had a terrible time, my sister Grace. She remained. She couldn't leave there. Her husband was at the front. She worked as a librarian at the front. She was so brilliant. She was so beautiful. You saw her picture? The most beautiful one of the family. She was gorgeous. She was, she went to see, my grandmother stayed with a cousin, a cousin, a third, fourth cousin of hers. And when my sister went in to see her, she had pneumonia. And she, and a day later she died. That was a terrible feeling, a terrible thing. It was an awful time. LEVINE: So then when you got in the way . . . HOCHMAN: And then from there we went to Roumania, after my mother got a little better. Our next place was getting to Roumania. We lived in Bucharest. We stayed there for three months before we got passports. LEVINE: Now, did you have to sneak over the border? HOCHMAN: Oh, that border. We had to go over a treacherous river and if people crossed the border in the winter and the ice broke they'd want to steal the, uh, over there. ( she coughs ) If they wanted to do that, then they would, they took chances. We were, we paid. They were paid to take us across on the boat. We went across on the boat and then you had to go up hills. My sisters, my two, the twins, were about four years old. They had to have been, I was eleven. I was about that. ( she coughs ) ( break in tape ) I was always like a sponge. Everything I brought, everything inside of me, and I had to, I had to know what's going on. And the family, people in the family, if you want to know anything, ask Gilda, she'll remember. She will remember. And I did. There were things I remember that none of my sisters would remember. If one of them would say, "I went to," of course, each of us lives different experiences. I mean, there can be five, the six of us, each of us took different things out of our lives. We were in the same situation, but each of us took something else out of it. We didn't all take the same thing out of it. LEVINE: What do you make of the fact that you do actively want to keep remembering these things, even though you need to live, you know, and forget them sometimes. And, say, your sisters who don't want to remember. HOCHMAN: I think it's good for me to do that. I think it's good. I think it's healthier for me, much healthier. I'm a healthier person, physically and mentally, as a result of that. I want to remember. I think people should remember that there was a Hitler, that there was this horror that should never be allowed again. That all these horrible things should not happen. That we should make, if we want to, if we don't want to destroy ourselves in this world we have to think positively. We have to begin living with each other, but not forgetting that these horrors must never occur again. Because if it does, people will just destroy, people will be destroyed, they'll be killing each other all the time. They'll become like animals. There must be a difference between the human and the animal. Those police who were beating this cop, the cop, they were beating this man. They behaved like animals. They were animals. They weren't human any more. Because when you're human, you can't, you must not behave that way. LEVINE: So you . . . HOCHMAN: That's the difference between an animal and a human. An animal will hate and ravage and so on. But that's the difference, we have a, supposedly more developed brains as a human being. If we have a chance to be educated, we learn that being good, and people talk about religion. People talk about different religions. The basis of all religion are the same. No matter what the religion is, and I don't care who believes in what, it's all the same for being a good person. So you don't have to be necessarily a Jew or a Christian or a Buddhist or a Mohammadan, or whatever other religion there is in the world, and there are thousands of religions. You don't have to believe in anything but the basics of being good, living well with people, love thy neighbor, be good to your neighbor. When does it happen? Look what happened in L.A. After all the tragedy, and it's not only that. The cleanup in Germany, the cleanup in wherever. The Queen of England travelling to Germany after they were nearly destroyed by the Germans, came down on the red carpet after that. People said to me, "Don't go to Germany. Don't ever go!" I said, "If the Queen of England, who was nearly destroyed, went there, why should I not go there to see what happened there?" The Israelis are dealing with the Germans. The people from Israel who, the top hats are there who came from the ravages of Poland. They are dealing with the Germans. We have to make peace in the world. We have to have peace in the world. People have to learn to live at peace with the world, with themselves, with each other. That's the way I feel. And that's why I want to remember, and that's why my kid sisters just push it away. And they're good people, they're wonderful people. I love them. But they don't want to, they don't want to remember. And I'm sure if you have a talk with them, they sound very intelligent, and they would tell you that they remember a lot of things, but they'd rather not talk about it. LEVINE: What do you think happens to those . . . HOCHMAN: I don't know. ( she coughs ) The fear. LEVINE: . . . to those memories when . . . HOCHMAN: Their fear. There's a lot of fear in them. And I know there was the fear in me, too. But it helps me. It helps me dilute it when I talk. So I, maybe in these few words that I said here, somebody who is reading this detected what I had to say, what else I had to say. How much more, how much depth, there was some depth in there. That's the only reason I can think why you people followed up. That there was discerning, someone reading who was discerning said, "Well, this is somebody," not that other people haven't anything to say. There were hundreds of thousands of people. Here you told me the people that you, they were fascinating, right? The things that they lived through? LEVINE: So let's continue on. After you got across to Roumania. HOCHMAN: We got to, that part of it was a sad part again. We got over the border. We came to, this was on a Friday morning again. So many things happened on a Friday. They, the, we ended up in a stall and somebody's stall. There was a house, and we ended up, and they opened up the door. The man of the house opened the stall and let us in. Then his wife woke up. It was about five in the morning, and then they took us into this house. And then it got lighter again. People were meeting my sister, Clara, this one ( she taps the picture ) had come over the border earlier with my brother. We all did, my mother and my father and my two kid sisters, and my sister Vivian who lives in Damia and I came with my parents. My others went by themselves with friends and with family, and they all went in different, some relatives took the other orphans, this one and that one and so on, that ended up where there were, the four of us, with my mother and father, six of us. So when we came there and we came out into the open, there were a lot of people standing around, and there were police. And it seems that they, either they weren't paid enough for crossing the border, or whatever. They took my brother, who had already been there. My brother came to get my father and us. They got my brother, they got my father, and they took them away, and we didn't know what happened to them. And my mother, this was Friday again, and all day long my sister Clara was, somebody reported that some, some of those who crossed illegally were in this-and-this house. ( clock chimes ) My sister, the people who owned that house gave my sister an apron, gave us the house keys to make her feel that she's part of the house. So she wasn't able to come anywhere near us. We were staying in this house, in this farmer's house. That evening, my mother, where she got, where this woman was. It turned out that this woman was a Jewish farmer, because she had candles in her house. And she gave my mother two candles. It was Friday night, and she could light two candles. I don't know where she, whether she used the potatoes, I didn't even remember that part of it at all. I just remember the light, the flickering of the candlelight, and my mother crying all night, and I was up all night. I'm sure my kid sisters were up, too. Because I ask them, they said they remember that night. You see, I have asked my sisters to speak up sometimes, and I have a tape of my sisters talking, my sister Clara talking, and my sister Viv talking, but not really in depth. Not what I'm telling you. LEVINE: Not feelings. HOCHMAN: They talked, I have these tapes. They talked of memories of long ago and not tra la la la, but just that they don't want to remember the pain. And many times I say I don't blame them. That's the way that they can exist. That's the way, maybe they wouldn't be able to exist otherwise. LEVINE: Everybody handles it their own way. HOCHMAN: Right. We're not able to. Now, I had had a lot of psychological help. I went for it. I was in therapy groups. I was in school groups. I was in, to this day I have worked on myself a lot. And I tried to work on my sisters. And we get along. We just, you know, we're devoted. We're clannish. We were a clan. We couldn't let go of each other. We were, our husbands suffered as a result of the way we were as a bunch, like a bunch of grapes that you have to tear them off like that? Well they had to have the kinds of things that you have to tear us away from our parents. Because if we were away from them we would lose our lives, we felt. So we had to stay close. And they had the control, no matter how much older we got. And no matter how much more mature we got, we were there and as a result our children were suffering, as a result of that. LEVINE: Because you . . . HOCHMAN: Because they also knew, felt, because . . . LEVINE: You maintained that bond . . . HOCHMAN: Closeness, bond. Bond with chains! You couldn't separate us, you couldn't separate us. LEVINE: Wow. That's very . . . HOCHMAN: And coming on the ship, we stayed, my mother nearly lost her life. She was in bed all the days that we were on the ship. And that's another trauma, that we were afraid we'd lose my mother. I was near my mother, didn't let go. I wanted some air to go, I went up, and I was doing fine, but I realized I had better go down to my mother, so I became sick, so I could go down, so I could be close. So I could have a reason for being down there. LEVINE: Well, what happened when your father and your brother were taken . . . HOCHMAN: When my brother and my father were taken away, the following day they were brought back. ( she pauses ) Most of the time when people went, they were never brought back. But whoever did that, I never found out what it was that brought them back, but they came back. The fact was that we came to this country all in one piece. These are the traumas that happened along the way, all along the way. My, we came to, we were in Roumania. My father could not, we could not hurry our trip. We came, finally we went from Roumania, when we got our passports in Roumania, three months, we stayed there three months. We went to Belgium. The doctors there said that my father and whoever was in charge that my father had a double hernia. He would not be able to come to America. So he had to be operated on. So that was another trauma that we thought we'd lose him. Here we were, kids, living through this. Now, these cousins of ours, these five orphans, one of them died en route. She was arrested, went to prison and died in prison. She had a heart attack. The other one attached herself to a young man, Mr. Brimberg's son, in fact, she married him. So she went off together with him. Another one went with a cousin, another cousin of ours, took the two boys that were part of the cousin. My cousin Eileen who lives in Sunrise, the one left, the only one left in the whole bunch of them, went with my, another first cousin of ours. So we had all these people that we're talking about, the closeness of people, what happened. But there was another question you asked me at this point, but I don't recall what it was that you asked me. What happened . . . LEVINE: Your father . . . HOCHMAN: When my father was in the, yes. My father and brother came back. Now, we're talking about Antwerp. We're talking about the fact that my father was operated on. And he was in a, interestingly enough, he was in the hospital where the, in a Catholic hospital. And the nuns were so marvelous. The nuns, the sisters, the nurses. They were nurses, but they were dressed like sisters, and they were called sisters. And we were in Antwerp for two months. From there we went to Southampton. I remember my brother working on my father and changing his bandages and so on. We travelled together. And then we went to Southampton. We stayed, we went to, and I think we were in London first, and then to Southampton. And then from Southampton we took the ship. END OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE ONE, TAPE TWO LEVINE: Now, where would you be staying in these different places? HOCHMAN: Different hotels, hotels. Low grade hotels. In Antwerp it was a lovely hotel, it happened to be. Antwerp is the cleanest place I've ever been in my life, so clean. LEVINE: Can you remember the things that struck you? I mean, here you'd been in this little village and . . . HOCHMAN: Well, I'll tell you what struck, oh, we went to, what countries we went by train through Germany, we went by, we were crossing everywhere, and the amazement of all these things in the world. Of course. It was amazing. And to think that people were, there was so much wonder in the world that people would want to hurt each other when there was so much beauty and there were so many things to see. It was fantastic, a fantastic experience. My sister Bernice had an infection in her ear and my mother held her. She still remembers that. That's one of the twins. She was a little girl when she was on the train. And she's the most tender of all my sisters. Well, she's my favorite of my sisters. She's one of the most magnificent human beings. Now, she'll talk about anything and everything, depending on what she remembers. But she wouldn't be afraid to talk about it. She's the only other one. My sister Grace was in therapy for a long time. She wrote, she, there was a book that my niece has that she's written about her experiences, and they, my niece, my sister Bernice's daughter Penny has it in California. I never went through that whole book. Penny and I were going to go through it and read it together and see what we make of it, and Penny is a very unusual, and Ginny, and my daughter, we were going to do that to see what we get out of it. When my daughter did her field work for her master's, she had a lot of, she did a lot of work with my family. Worked with my sisters, my brothers, and spent time with them. And she found them very interesting. And when I used to discuss and tell her the closeness, she said she realized what that meant, this closeness, how we couldn't let each other go, couldn't leave my father and mother, couldn't leave the nest. Could not leave it. Because out there there was danger. When you see nature and you watch these birds and these things, and these babies watching, they know there's danger, they hide and the parents sit on them. This is the same kind of thing. LEVINE: Survival, really. HOCHMAN: Survival. LEVINE: Okay. So Southampton, when you got there. HOCHMAN: So we got, then we went on the ship, and then my mother was ill. And then we travelled, and we finally came to what looked like America. They said, "America." We finally saw, we arrived on a Friday. Arrived on a Friday. My aunt and uncle, and we're here, I have it, my aunt and uncle came from Bayonne, New Jersey. And we had to be endorsed by someone who was an American citizen to have a cousin who was in the army. And he was in the service, so he was certainly an American citizen. And he came to bail us out. I remember when we got out of the street, there were photographers. Somewhere I still feel there was a picture of our family because there were photographers who were taking our pictures. And I've always been looking, even in Ellis Island. I haven't looked through all the pictures. Somewhere, I think, there was a picture of our family. Because I remember one young lady putting us all together and saying, "Stay there." And she was taking a photograph, a picture of us. LEVINE: But this was, was this at Ellis Island? HOCHMAN: At Ellis Island. LEVINE: Oh. HOCHMAN: Just as we came into the open. LEVINE: Now, what was the name of the ship? HOCHMAN: I got it. I have it here. For the moment I can't remember. The Adriatic. Yeah, that's right. LEVINE: The Adriatic. Okay. Well, do you remember coming into the New York Harbor? HOCHMAN: Oh, sure. Oh, the Statue of Liberty. The Statue. I remember people walking and eating. And we couldn't understand that. And people chewing gum. But the chewing gum didn't affect me as much because my grandfather came to America twice and went back again to, back to Europe, back home, he called it. He did not like America. He did not like the way the people behaved. He did not like the way they were chewing gum. "Like cows," he'd say. And that I remembered. I don't like chewing gum to this day. Didn't like the idea of feeling that I, when my grandfather said that. LEVINE: Okay. What do you remember when you got to Ellis Island? HOCHMAN: I remembered, as I say, I saw the people walking and just walking around and eating frankfurters. I didn't know what that was, but they were eating. LEVINE: Do you remember anything about the examination, about your family being processed? HOCHMAN: Well, I'll tell you one of the things that I remember, they deloused us. And that was so embarrassing. They would pick up the hair and so on. But my mother was a very clever woman. She said we learn, we live through all these things and pogroms and things, and my mother always used kerosene on our hair. We all had to have our hair washed, and she would make sure. Because the lice were everywhere. And so they were looking for lice, but my mother made sure that we have, wherever we were, when we were in Southampton and Antwerp, no matter, that we were clean. So we were clean. The only thing is that my sister Bernice, because she had an eye infection, she had an ear infection. Now, we were, my sister Anne talks about that, her twin sister. We only talked about it recently. They were so thrilled when this happened to me, they said, "You're the only one." We knew that somebody had to get you. That's what they say. And I said, "It could happen to you, too, if you'd just open your mouth and say something." But my sister Bernice, when they started looking at the eyes and they sent people back, my sister Anne said, "I was thinking to myself, 'Where would she go?' There was no one there." So I said, so you look at the emotion, I felt, when I saw that, I wondered, but I felt that, at that time, I was so concerned with myself. I remember being very self-centered and selfish that I was concerned with myself. What is going to happen to me in this new world. Without even realizing it. That's the feeling I had. I saw all these things happening around, but I was really thinking about what am I going to do with my life. LEVINE: Now, were you detained there? HOCHMAN: No. They let us all go. This man came and took us. Now, one of the reasons why people are amazed when I speak, my friends and all, who know that I came here as a child, that I ought to have a terrible foreign accent. Because my sisters have, my older sisters have, not my younger ones. But I had an experience with a cousin of mine who was born in this country. And we came, we lived in Brooklyn, on New Jersey Avenue, 485 New Jersey Avenue. I still remember it. It's a long time ago. I remember most of the addresses where we lived as children. 82 Belmont Avenue. I remember that my mother, we, my brothers set up an apartment for us and immediately my family, they opened a fish store for my mother and father and they both worked. They were young. They were in their forties. And we were kids. So we were going to school. I was practically twelve years old when I was put into school, placed in the first grade. I had gone to school, and I had math. I knew how to add and subtract and multiply and divide. I knew math, but I didn't know English. The only English that I knew was the, we had a young British waiter, a charming young man, who was very much interested in what was going on. Here were these people going to a foreign country, I'll teach you. LEVINE: On the ship? HOCHMAN: On the ship. And he said, he said to us, "I'll teach you some words. I can't teach you everything." He said, "But I'll teach you how to count." And he began to count from one to twenty, and when he got to twenty he said, "Don't you ever say twenty like the Americans." I never said "twenny" in my life. When I count it's, "Twen-ty." Always twenty. And I learned to say "thank you," and "please." And a couple of other words. I can't recollect what they were. But that was the extent of the language that I came with to America. And I got into this first grade. The teacher would give me one and one or two and two and immediately give me an A. And then she would give me words, and I didn't know what they were. I got a C. I was very unhappy. I bought a little dictionary. I started studying. But I never opened my mouth. When the teacher would say something to me, "Stand up and say something." I nothing, nothing, nothing. But every time she said a word, or any of the kids said anything, I would always tell that they weren't speaking right, those who weren't speaking correctly. I would be able to tell in my own mind. I couldn't imagine how. But when the teacher spoke, I listened. And then, with some children, if they were correct that they spoke properly, I could tell that it was right. And I listened. Then, as I said, my personality was sponge-like anyway. So I was sponging in all this stuff, but never talked. One Friday my mother said, Friday again, my mother said, and I was married to my first husband on a Friday, and I was married to my second husband on a Friday. It's the most interesting thing. I said to my, my mother said, "You know, we have, I have a sister-in-law." Her father's sister. Her, yes. She, her tanta, her aunt. She lives on this-and-this street, about six blocks up from where we lived, on Blake Avenue. "She has a little girl your age. Why don't you go over there and make friends with her? Go there, and you'll meet a cousin." It sounded logical to me. So I took that step, though it wasn't easy for me to tear myself away from my mother, Friday night, to go and to do, and this was like a dusk, just about dusk. And I walked there, and it was already beginning to get a little dark. I was a little scared. And I, I was scared. I was still scared to make the adjustment. We'd been in the country maybe four months. So I was scared anyway. I was free, but I was scared. There were new experiences. These were all new things happening to me. And I was getting into puberty. I mean, the whole thing was brewing. And so I knocked at the door. I found the door. I knocked at the door. My aunt came, this aunt came to the door, and she said, "Oh!" My Yiddish name was Goldala. And she hugged me. "Goldala!" And she knew me. I said to her in Yiddish, "Where is my cousin?" And I hear two little girls talking in the background. And one is saying, and they're talking English, and one is saying to the other, it was only later I realized, but I surmised what they said. They said, "Wait till this greenhorn," the word greenhorn and greaseball I heard on the street. They didn't like us at all. They humiliated us. And I can understand why people don't want other people to come into their lives, and they don't. They don't, in California they don't want the Koreans, and the blacks don't want the whites, and the whites don't want the blacks and so on. I can understand what these things are. People don't want. Here is my cousin, my blood relative who didn't want me. I was interfering in her life, already interfering in her life. I only, all I did was want to come in and say hello to her. But she was my age. She already knew that I was interfering in her life evidently. Well, the interesting part of it was she said to her, whatever she said, and immediately I said, "Greenhorn, greaseball, greenhorn. Then we'll go. Wait till this greenhorn leaves." I turned around, opened the door, walked out, and I cried all the way home. And I came to Mom, and my mother said, and I was just, I cried. I wept. And my Mom said she was sorry that she sent me. She understood. And she said, "But you'll grow up," she said, "and you'll make friends. And I'll tell you, years later when I, and I made up my mind on the way walking with this crying, that no one is going to call me a greenhorn. No one is ever going to detect that I was ever a greenhorn. And I began to learn my dictionary. To this day, every day, I look in my dictionary. I learn, I always learn words or things or whatever. There's always something that I look in the dictionary. I find that a very important book in my life. LEVINE: So do you think that vow to yourself that you made . . . HOCHMAN: Oh, yes. LEVINE: . . . when you were walking back home had ramifications just for the rest of your life? HOCHMAN: Uh, you mean that hurt, that pain? LEVINE: Yes. That greenhorn, not wanting to . . . HOCHMAN: Well, I'll tell you, but I came out of it, because I began to study and to learn and to do. And when I met her, the same cousin, years later, she was like a spindle. She grew and she grew and she grew. And she was this wide. ( she gestures ) And I met her in Florida. And she was so happy to see me, and I recalled this to her. She said, "I was so stupid." I said, "But I had to, but there was pain nevertheless." She said, "Wasn't that stupid." She said, "And I was stupid." I said I didn't know, I wasn't thinking in the stupidity. I was just thinking of the pain that you gave me. She said, "I don't blame you." And she died shortly after. She died. She was too heavy and she was sick and so on. She died. She was the one who taught me to whom I owe. I said to her, "I owe you a thanks because you made me realize that I'd better do something with my life." And she was amazed that I said that. LEVINE: Can you think of any other things, incidents, that happened? Either incidents like that that were so emotional, or things your mother or father said to you about how you should live that made an impact? HOCHMAN: My father, I had a very bad experience with my father and mother. I could have never forgiven them for a long time. But what I wanted to say is that the impact, all these things that happened, eventually you have to forgive. You have to forgive. You don't forget, maybe, and when you recall all this, you don't, you remember, you recall it, but you have to forgive. I forgave my father in this country when we came, got together, we always had thirty, forty people. They had a small apartment. They had to own the house, a two-family house. They had a basement, and people would come, all our friends, cousins, cousins' cousins, everybody would gather in our house. It was always open house. For a Passover seder we had forty-six to sixty people. It didn't matter. It was, and we always, all, each child had acquired friends. These friends were like adopted children. So we always had more adopted daughters and sons and so on and so on. My father would have a birthday on the part, the holiday that's called Succoth, Succoth. And he would have the party for himself. He made his own birthday party. And I remember him standing and most of the time he would make different speeches. He was a speechmaker. But he made a lot of sense at times. He looked out at this throng, he would say, "I have no money in the bank, but I'm a millionaire. I look out at these people, and these are my dividends." He said, "This is all my wealth out there." That was touching. Now, on the other hand, they were going through the difficult part of their lives, and I remember being as a child where I, first I had this trauma with losing the two. Now this trauma happened when I was four years old, when my father brought the fish. ( clock chimes ) Once a year at passover time, Easter time, he would bring a wagon of fish for the neighbors. I was four years old, a big wagon of fish, and the fish came right from the lakes, and I could see the fish jumping. They were still alive. And they had scales and they weighed them. And oh, twenty, thirty people, neighbors, all standing around, and I was this high, this low ( she gestures ). I saw them putting the weights on the scale. I took a weight, whatever it was, a pound. You know, I was so tiny, whatever it was, an iron, the old-fashioned weights with the handles, and I had a little cane, and they ran to get the thing from me, and I ran away, ran to the back of our kitchen and ran over the threshold and the thing fell on, the little cane fell on my hand and the weight on it and it crushed the finger, the hand. And so my brother, my older brother and a friend of his, they carried me, they couldn't stop the blood. They carried me to the drugstore. And the druggist put, they couldn't stop the bleeding, evidently, so they put a, whatever percentage of whatever to stop the blood, five percent or one percent, he put on fifteen percent, and gangrene set in. Gangrene set in, and they were going to remove my hand. But somehow, I don't know what happened, they took me to the next town, where you go to where my sister, where they had a big hospital. We had a hospital, but not, uh, so they took me there. And my mother tells me that she went away, six blocks away she could hear me scream, because they had no anesthetic or so on. They finally brought it down to this and they removed the two joints. I, this was a trauma that I would keep my hand, for years I had my hand in the back. Nobody ever saw it. Yet I learned to type eighty words a minute typing without this finger. That's, so. This was that trauma. Then my father came home, I always wanted my, I needed a father, like every child needs a father. I needed a father, but I substituted my grandpa. He was my, really my Rock of Gibraltar. When my grandpa lied down, and I lied down next to him for a nap, I felt his back and he was my rock. He wanted me to scratch his toes. I was so happy to do that. My father, I knew my father would come. So I guess I must have thought in my mind that I have to get my father, my father's attention somewhere, somehow. So I saw his shoes and I said, "Why don't I polish his shoes? That would be a nice idea, a nice thing. And when he comes home, he'll notice that I polished his shoes." And I began to polish his shoes, and really polish. I called spit and polish. Well, I did everything. I saw a little towel laying there. It didn't look sharp, I mean, it didn't look, they weren't shining enough. I took that thing and I began to shine them. My mother came along and she said, "What did you do?" You took that towel? Look what you did to it. Wait till Papa comes home." You know the old saying when Papa comes home? Well, Papa came home, and Mama came to him and she held the towel, and before he had a chance, I had a chance to say anything to him, he saw the shoes, and she told him the story, and she said, he took his belt off. This was the first thing they did, when he got mad, and he began to beat me. Now, that trauma has stayed with me all my life, but I forgave him, as I say. I have forgiven him because I was, I was a good daughter. I was the one who saw him die, the first one. I came from New York City to take him back to the hospital that day. They were going to operate on him, and he was smart enough to die. And I walked in and my brother said, "I just gave Papa some cereal." I said, "I'll go in to see him, and I'll prepare him to take him to the hospital." I walked in, and he looked at me and he closed his eyes and he was gone. Now I, all that trauma stayed with me for many, many years. It was almost an unforgiving kind of thing. My sister, my older sister Grace, the thing that I remember about her hands was that they were the whitest and most beautiful hands. She always did studying and library work and things like that. She took that, she would take her collars and cuffs. When she went to school she wore a uniform, a dark uniform with white collars and cuffs. And my mother wouldn't let her do anything because she was the one who wanted to study, and she wanted her to study. She wanted her to be somebody. So she, my sister would take some soap. We didn't have Irish soap or anything. She would take a piece of soap and she would take a knife and cut little pieces and make suds, and wash those things. That I remember. And her hands were as white as snow. We came to the, she came by way of Mexico. Eventually she came to America. My father and my brothers opened a store for my brother-in-law who was an engineer by profession, he didn't know the language when he came here, he ended up in a fish store. He was also a prized photographer in the Soviet, in Russia, on the front. So my sister helped him in the store and she really did not know how to handle fish and what to do. She was trying to help him cut something on the fish. Whatever it was, she cut her finger and it began to bleed. And she went, and they took her to the drugstore, and they couldn't stop her. She lost two joints of this finger, because the gangrene set in . . . LEVINE: What did your father do? HOCHMAN: He was a fishermen. LEVINE: Here, in this country? HOCHMAN: In this country, too. LEVINE: Oh. Uh-huh. HOCHMAN: Soon as they came, my mother and father got, my brother got them a fish store, and they worked there. LEVINE: I see. HOCHMAN: And I used to help them as a child. I used to help them. I knew how to maneuver the fish, and how to cut and how to scrape. And to this day when I went fishing with my husband Bill, who was such a fisherman, we used to fish, and he used to say his other wife wouldn't touch a fish, he was so afraid. He said, "Look at you, you're . . ." END OF SIDE ONE, TAPE TWO BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO, TAPE TWO LEVINE: Okay. I want to be sure we get in before the tape is over, what did you do then? Did you compelte school or did you go to work early? HOCHMAN: I went, this is what I did. I went on to, I graduated from junior high school. And from there I hwent to a commercial school in New York City and I took commercial law and I took Spanish and I took shorthand and typing and whatever courses I could take. And I graduated from there, and I got a job in law offices. I got my first law office job in Brooklyn for a Mr. Mirabeau. And I used to take briefs and go to court with him and all kinds of things. When I met my husband, oh, in school, in school he taught . . . LEVINE: Your husband? HOCHMAN: Yes. He taught psychology, mini-psychology. And I, in that course he said, he asked me would I take some of the girls and buy some ice cream. We would treat the girls during recess. So I took a couple of the girls. My friend Gertrude, who died a few years ago who was, we were close friends. She also was in school with me. And we did that. Then one day he asked me would I go to a lecture with him, would I go to a symphony with him. And he said, "You know, when I first heard you speak in class, every time I asked a question, you were the first one up and you were, you had an answer." And he said, "Uh, I thought that you were a Bostonian, came from Boston, that came from somewhere. Somewhere where you were taught well, and taught well to speak. You spoke, you opened your mouth, words came out, not dribble. And he was three years older than I. I was so impressed with him. Here was a man talking to me that way. I was fearful of men, terribly fearful of men. I think to this day I'm fearful of men. I pretend I'm not, but I think I am. And we saw each other, we went out with each other. He took me to a theater, and I became very much interested in the theater, in culture of all kinds, museums and so on. And he was in law school. He was going to law school in the afternoons, and he taught at school. Well, he, then when I graduated I started working, and then I started going with him. And two years later we were married. I was eighteen when I married, and he was just graduating, finishing school. Then he had to take the bar and I, he always said that I was the lawyer, not he, became I made him, and so on. Of course that wasn't the truth. I helped him, true, but that was. I was always, then I began to go to the New School For Social Research. I went there for eleven years. But I never, oh, well, first we moved to Bayonne, New Jersey when we were married. And he opened a school, a commercial school, and I taught typing and shorthand. And I was a good teacher, in fact. I met students later in life who told me, "I'll never forget the way you taught typing. I'm a good typist because you were such a strict teacher." So, but actually I had a feeling that I wasn't really worthy of success. That was most of the things that happened in my whole life, of not being worthy. LEVINE: How did you realize that you weren't, that you didn't feel worthy? HOCHMAN: Well, because from its beginning, I wasn't worthy to be a child, I wasn't worthy, and so on and so on. That builds itself into the body and to the mind, and so on. I learned later on, I mean, that I was worthy. All right. But then it was already later in my life. I would take courses and I would do very well in the courses, but I did not want to take a degree. I did not want to get into higher education to get a degree. I kept on going to school. I took Russian again and I took French and I took Spanish, and philosophy and I even took physics. I took a whole year of physics. I took socio-drama. I took three years of socio-drama. I had a Dr. Smith, who was marvelous, at the New School. Never wanted to take courses to get a degree because that would mean success to me, and I learned that later. But that's the way it happened. LEVINE: Was your family wanting to become Americanized, your mother and father? HOCHMAN: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. They were so proud to be American. They became . . . LEVINE: Did they become citizens? HOCHMAN: Certainly. I taught my mother how to read. I taught, I bought her a reader, a first grade reader, and I taught her how to read. And my father, they became citizens, yes, definitely. I became a citizen. When I was a child, under him, up to a certain age. Then I became a citizen when I lived in Mount Vernon, New York. Years later, when my children were grown, I became a citizen. And my friend Francis Anchin was my witness, my next door neighbor and friend. LEVINE: So then did you have your children with your first husband? HOCHMAN: I had the children with my first husband. And I only married Bill seventeen years ago. I was married to him forty- nine years. It would have been fifty years when my husband became ill. He had a couple of heart attacks first, but then he disintegrated. He had brain cancer and he was operated on and he was in a coma for a year, and that was a sad part of my life. LEVINE: Yeah. Why don't you say your husband's name and your children's name? HOCHMAN: Oh, sure. His name was Saul, Solomon, Solomon Huber. He is known in the field of insurance as a famous man. My son, Mel, Melvyn with a Y, M-E-L-V-Y-N, and he was named after Melvyn Douglas, who is my favorite actor. And Virginia Sue Huber, that's her. And we call her Ginny. I call her Ginny. And, um . . . LEVINE: Do you have grandchildren? HOCHMAN: I have three grandchildren. I have a granddaughter thirty-three years old, Vicky. And she's married five years, and she lives in Virginia, and she's a lawyer. She was a night judge. And she's a brilliant child, just lovely. And I gave her, I'm looking at my dining room table, did I have it here or in the other room? I gave her my dining room set and my breakfront recently, last year. Here she is. ( presenting a photo ) That's her. That's Victoria. We call her Vicky. And here she is again. Here's her family. Here she is. Here. I was there a year ago for Christmas. They live in Christiansburg, Virginia. Then I have David. My son has three children. This is my son. That's my daughter-in-law, and they have three children, Michael, David and Vicky. And Michael is forty years old, David is thirty-nine, thirty-eight-and-a-half years. They're fourteen months apart. David is going to be forty this year. Michael was forty this past year. David's going to be forty next year. And Vicky is going to be thirty-four. My daughter was fifty. My son and daughter are thirteen years apart. LEVINE: Okay. Well, before the tape ends, I would like you to just think about the, coming from Russia, your early experiences, the trip, the coming to this country. What would you say has been the impact of the life that you've had. I mean, such a traumatic . . . HOCHMAN: What was the most traumatic? What was the most traumatic? LEVINE: No, I guess I, I'm wondering how you, how you, how did you make sense of it? HOCHMAN: How did I come out of it alive? ( she laughs ) LEVINE: Yeah. HOCHMAN: I guess the fact that we were so closely knit and though my parents, the things that hurt, that incident with the shoes and so on, I realized that the problems that they had, what they were living through to try to keep us together, to try to keep us alive. In that terrible era, in that terrible time. Because those times, those years, and going. I'm just thinking of the one time climbing that mountain and carrying my two little kid sisters on their backs, and my taking one child and holding on my back, and carrying them and helping, and togetherness, together. The determination of getting away from this misery of where we were to someplace and coming to a land where we found freedom was something that I saw there was a life to be. And whatever I made, I might have made all kinds of mistakes in my life, as a mother, as maybe a grandmother or whatever, I came out. I'm going to be eighty-three years old. The 27th of June, which was picked for me as a date, as I told you I don't know exactly the date, but it was between May and June I was born, because I was born on a holiday, Shvues. That's, so I know that whenever it comes out, it could have been this month, that month and so on. But it was within that time, and I'm going to be eighty-three years old. I'm living well. I'm very fortunate. My husband and I worked very hard all through the years. My husband made some investments and we lived well, and left me everything, and I've helped my kids. That's the, that is the bottom line. I helped my kids, when Vicky needed help. My son is a lawyer. My son is a wonderful person. My son gave up a job as vice-president of an insurance company and he went back to law to be a general practitioner because he didn't want the rat race. My granddaughter had worked for a big concern as a lawyer. She graduated from William and Mary. And she also did not want the rat race, left that, and is working for the state and is a night judge and is perfectly happy. Married to this young man who's lovely, Rick. And Michael is not married. He's forty years old, and he now is in school. He wants to be a psychologist, but he wants to deal with addictions, drugs and smoking and etcetera. And David is a lawyer. As I told you, did I tell you? He studied in different, yes, I told you, that he took the bar. LEVINE: Yes. HOCHMAN: Yes. Different, three bars that he took. That's David. And married Joy, and they have, their children are growing, and they live in Seattle. And it turned out that my daughter went to Seattle first and settled there, and David went to Seattle. When Joy's mother died, they moved there and he took the bar, and now they live in Seattle. Michael lived through the hurricane, the last hurricane in, he lived in North Carolina, Charleston. And when they had the hurricane, Michael almost lost his life there. But he stayed on in Seattle and learned to do carpentry and build Seattle, I mean, not, Charleston. And then David bought a house in Seattle, and Michael went there and stayed there for a year and did the carpentry to help him rebuild his house because they didn't have that much money to do it. So I helped them a little, and so this is, we're a close-knit family, but we are not the way my, we were with my parents. We all learned that you can be close, but you don't have to feel afraid. LEVINE: That's a wonderful place, I think, to end. HOCHMAN: Yes. LEVINE: Thank you very much. HOCHMAN: Okay, darling. LEVINE: It's been a pleasure talking with you. This is Janet Levine for the National Park Service, and I am signing off.