NASH: Today is January 29, 1974 and I'm speaking with Mr. Edward Hong. Mr. Hong is a lawyer in Chinatown and he also owns a travel agency and an insurance company. And it happens that Mr. Hong was the second practicing Chinese lawyer in New York State. Well Mr. Hong, we'd like to know something about your immigration. When did you first come here? HONG: Well, I was born in China in 1915, and when I was eight years old, I came to the United States in 1923 with my father and mother and an elder brother. NASH: Well, what do you remember about the place that you came from? What was the name of it? HONG: I was born in a little village known as Hen Chin village. Literally translated that means, it's "the heart of the fields" village, close to a city called Kim Ye city, sixty miles from the big city of Canton. It's about eighty miles from Hong Kong. I had never seen my father after birth until he returned from the United States in 1923 to come back and bring my mother, myself and my older brother to the United States. He had been here in the United States for along time. He had operated restaurants all over the country. He had a restaurant in Danville, Illinois, which is the area where the famous Lincoln-Douglas debate, so when I immigrated from my native home in the China mainland, I came directly by ship which took I think about eighteen days. I think it was the year that they had the big earthquake in Japan, and I remember coming over here, arriving at Angels Island, which is the detaining area for the Immigration and Naturalization Service, at that time which was part of the Department of Labor, and we were detained there until the inspection. Angels Island is right outside of San Francisco. And then after inspection, we were admitted and I remember coming in. It was a day or two before Thanksgiving of the year 1923, and since that time I have been a real member of the rest of the citizens of the United States. NASH: What was the thing that made your father leave originally? HONG: Well, my father, I presume that any person who came to the United States, well, i should say, I should go back to my grandfather who came over probably. I do not know, I have mo idea. I believe they must have come over during the days when they built the railroads in the west and so forth and I remember something that my great-grandfather or grandfather or something like that having operated a laundry in Portland, Oregon, and so forth and I think my father was born here in the United States and then, of course, in those days there weren't too many Chinese women there and he went back to China to be married, and I and my older brother were offsprings during his visit to China and his marriage, and then after that, he returned back to America to pursue a living, and then in 1923, he came back to bring over my--the first time that I remember him being my father was when he came back in 19--I think he came back about 1922 and stayed about a year and then he brought the family over to the United States. NASH: Do you remember your reactions when yo saw your father for the first time? HONG: I don't recall too much except not the occasion that I saw him, but I remember about a month or so before my mother had heard from him that he was returning and he was preparing me to say that my father was coming from the United States. I remember about my childhood of them talking about World War I, of the United States engaging in war and things of that nature, but it's just fleeting things, nothing specific. NASH: What do you remember about Angel's Island? HONG: Well, Angel's Island was a little island. I remember seeing my first motor car there and we'd go up there and they's have, well, (cough), pardon me, I (sneezing) I don't know exactly what --I don't remember any bars, but you know Angel's Island is another island like, off San Francisco, like Alcatraz, so the only way you can go in there is by ferry, so they take the aliens and put them over there, which is similar to the New York when they had Ellis Island, and an immigrant comes to the United States, they would put the immigrant over on Ellis Island, hold him there until they are good and ready to give him a hearing and when they have a hearing, they'll prove whether he is entitles to be admitted to the United States or not, and then after admission, he'll go in. NASH: How long was your family there? HONG: Gee, I do not remember. I would say maybe a few weeks. NASH: Weeks! HONG: A few weeks. That wasn't long. I even remember my--when I was practicing law and immigration law and when the immigrants came here, when they were detained at Ellis Island, why we waited three months before we'd even get a hearing and some people were after the hearing, they were denied and people were detained on Ellis Island for a year, a year and a half before--and they weren't even given the opportunity to post bond to be out on bond until the appeal of their cases were over. NASH: Well, what was the reason that they held your family there for so long? HONG: It's not a question--holding, I think the question was that, there's too much case load and they only have so many inspectors, until the inspector came around to your cases, like waiting in court until your case is heard. NASH: What was your mother's reaction to all of that? HONG: Well, I would say that, I was too young then to, you know, to really realize anything, you know. I would say that when the hearing came, it was very quick because there was nothing asked of me, and all they asked my brother was is this your father, is this your mother? And he said, yes, this is my father, this is my mother, and then we were admitted, you know, like anything else, it's the waiting time, it's not the actual hearing or the actual case that takes the time. NASH: Did your mother feel like she was in prison or anything like that? HONG: I don't think so. I don't think my mother was as enlightened as people are today that they fight for civil liberties and all that kind of rights. They thought it was routine and she was comfortable, and I think everyone accepted the facts. NASH: Well, what kind of a time did you have getting used to the United States as an eight-year-old- boy and later? HONG: Well, I came to Danville, and then I was put into school. I started grade school. Of course, being eight years old and not understanding a word of the language and put into, well, I started from the first grade, so I wasn't put in a grade that is equivalent to my age or anything of that nature. However, it was difficult because I came to class and I don't know the routine and I couldn't tell the teacher when something happened, and so there were quite a bit of problems there. A teacher would report back to my parents saying that I was, didn't follow this and didn't follow that, but, you know, I think that was only normal. It was difficult because the things I read I didn't understand . I had a couple of years of Chinese schooling before I came here. I mean in things like figures and mathematics and all that, and I could do it in Chinese just as well as in English, so I had no problem, but the question was English and conversing and understanding. Yes, it took a little time just like any person would work into a rural area would face that difficulty and then in the summertime my folks had engaged a teacher, one of the teachers in school, to give me, well, give me, my brother, I had a first cousin who also came at the same time with us, and so the three of us took private lessons in order to catch up for the lack of education, like if you're born here, by the time you go to school, you would have understood the language, whereas I had to catch up and understand the language and yo convey my thoughts there, and naturally, it is quite a hardship. I can remember back that even when I got up to the eighth grade, so forth, my vocabulary was not that good, you know, to speak grammatically correct, and to really converse well took some time. See, another thing that is a drawback in a case like myself, I think is peculiar to all immigrants is that your father and mother do not speak the language well. As a matter of fact, my mother doesn't even speak a word of English, and my father speaks very well English, and so when you come home, they are talking to you the native language and they tell you that you should continue the old tradition from the old country and so forth so that there's really no help from your own family to improve your indoctrination or integration into the community the way that we--it was purely the process of your friends in school and, well, as I told you my father ran a restaurant in Danville and, well, we weren't rich in those days. Every able bodied child or men had to help in the family so, I mean, I really didn't have any time to spend playing with fellow classmates or anything else like that after school. I came home, I tried to study and then I helped out with the-my father's work in the restaurant and so forth, so, I mean, I think I spent my whole childhood on, well, in a way, you can say in servitude rather than enjoying yourself like today's children. NASH: Did you get paid by your father? HONG: Yes, my father paid me, yes. As a matter of fact, he paid me twenty dollars a month in wages and then plus my tips. As a matter of fact, I earned my money which in a few years later permitted me to attend college during the Depression. Otherwise, I would not have had that opportunity. NASH: Did you know any other Chinese families in Danville? HONG: No. Ours was the only family. My uncle was there and I told you my first cousin, and then there were other, two other Chinese, no three other Chinese men, two of them had a partnership in a laundry and another person had a laundry by himself. Those were the only Chinese in the whole town. It was a town of about, I think in those days about thirty thousand people. Today I think they have about forty thousand people. Danville is a town, a mining town. It was next to Westville, Illinois, which is one of the very soft coal mining areas. U.S. Steel used to have their mining area next to (?) Zinc Company and then it was more or less like the railroad center where all farm people, the products as well as the coal and the zinc, (?) Zinc Company was I think the second largest zinc company in the whole United States, so Danville was more or less a town where all these people come in on Saturday night and enjoyed--it's like Dodge City in the-- NASH: Really! (laughter) HONG: It really is. NASH: Was it that roughneck? (laughter) HONG: Well, in when I was first there, people weren't roughish. It was, well, no, go back to 1923 in the days of the automobile we still had the horse drawn carts and you still had the ice man deliver ice. We didn't have refrigerators and other things. People come into town on Saturday to shop and get produce, but we don't have the saloons and stuff like that. We don't have the people coming in with guns and all that sort of thing, but in a way, how you say, twentieth century Dodge City and some of the these people were (?) they enjoy themselves. They come into town and have a few drinks and so forth and it was a lively town compared to our town which is purely, I mean like the big farms out there, you know, obviously it's not like a metropolitan city New York, why you have to go say fifteen miles before you see the next town and from there the closest town was Rossville which is thirteen miles away and from Rossville you go up to (?) took you forty miles, you go through forty miles of farm country without seeing anything but the two gas stations. You can imagine what the country is like. NASH: What was it like being one of few Chinese families in the area? HONG: Well, we didn't have a rough time. We had one or two occasions, you know, interference from some of the other children that gave you a hard time, but I mean, very few really, very little incidence, maybe a little incidence because of the fact that I was not in contact with them because, I mean, well I mean in those days when a child goes to school, he doesn't go half a day, he goes the full day. You know you go to school at eight o'clock in the morning. You don't get out until three thirty and by that time I, well, I come home. I come home about four thirty or five o'clock, I help my father, you know. By ten o'clock you go to bed, so you don't have a chance to get in trouble. And so there were hardly any incidents because of the fact, well, no distractions and my father kept a great discipline, so by studying I made pretty good grades. I wasn't one that hated school and didn't study or anything else like that so there was no occasion. And then because of the fact that I was small and I grew up. I was more or less integrated into the system, into the community, and the people were very nice. They helped me a lot. As a matter of fact, my landlord to my father's restaurant had a real estate agency. He was an old fellow and he had nothing to do and he asked me to come to his office, you know, when he was not there. He taught me English there, so we had help from everybody and because we grew up there, practically everybody knew us. We were the only Chinese restaurant in the whole town and there was a few others and the well-to-do people, say the upper strata, the city come in there and they knew me ever since I was a little kid and then going to school and graduating from college,so they were very sympathetic and I think the experience of working and learning the business and being in the business world had helped me to make myself successful when I came to New York. NASH: I'm just curious. Where did your family get the supplies for the Chinese food when they were there in Illinois? HONG: Well, this certain dry goods and stuff like that which you get from the supply house in Chicago, so they buy railway express. However, certain things you substitute like if you don't have the Chinese (?) so you use (?) or fresh vegetables like, well, like here in New York they do not use all Chinese vegetables. They still use vegetables like celery, onions, which is a staple, and other greens and so forth. But there was a German shoemaker in Champaign, Illinois, which is thirty miles away when I went to college there and he took the Chinese seed and he had a small Chinese restaurant and he knew what to do with them. He grew them and he put the fertilizer in and he grew the vegetables, even became large and (?) Chinese farm. NASH: And what did he do with them? HONG: He gave it to me by the bushels, so we had plenty. There was no trouble getting. He got the seed. As a matter of fact, we had a house in Danville. My mother has a little garden in back. Well, we don't use it for the restaurant part, but I mean we had--we grow it and practically all the Chinese vegetables we want. NASH: Where are your parents now? HONG: Well, my father died in 1933 in my first year of college and my mother died ten years later when I was in the service. NASH: Well, how did you become a lawyer? Why did you become a lawyer? (laughter) HONG: Well, to tell you the truth, as you know, my father had--not had too much education and maybe, well, after I finished high school, really, my elder brother, who's a doctor, William L. Hong, and some of the customers would come to the restaurant and ask us what we're going to do after graduation from high school and all that and through a lot of encouragement. And one of them was a dentist and all that and wanted to talk about going to (?) and then somehow through my elder brother and all that and I would just more or less tag along and we went, started going to the university, which is the University of Law about thirty miles away, and I didn't know anything about the university. I mean, it was farthest thought. I had no idea that I was even going to finish college or knew anything what my goal was, and I after I graduated I took the college entry course and I was accepted. My brother was accepted and he started and he took a different course. I took an engineering course and I guess at that time I thought maybe perhaps after I graduate I could go back to China and maybe become an engineer and maybe help develop the country of China, but then after I graduated in 1937. it was tough to find a job. I had an interview with Westinghouse Electric Company and they hired me, but right then and there I graduated in June, 1937. On July 7, 1937, the Japanese bomb, Shanghai and we had a war going on over there and that's how I came to New York for the first time to be interviewed by the Hancock manager at Westinghouse who is a Chinese then. I remember going down Wall Street and he told me, you know, I'd like to have you over, but we can't do anything about it now because we have to divert all our shipment, we're not doing anything in China because of the Japanese war, and so I, and thirty-seven was still a Depression year and it was tough to get a job and all that and so I continued to--I was looking for a job but then one successful--I went through Western Electric, I went to all these other places that really would like to hire me and the question of discrimination in those days were there. They didn't know how they would feel to have a Chinese supervisor over other employees, so quite difficulties. NASH: How did they put that to you? HONG: Oh, they told me straight. As a matter of fact, one of them sent to the head of the college there, he said, one of the nicest graduates that you have in your classes is this Chinese boy, but we couldn't hire him because he's Chinese, and well, in those days, you didn't have anybody fighting for you, so you accept the fact that if they want to discriminate, they discriminate, choose whoever they want, and so that's the reason afterward, I was out a half year and I said, well, now (?) when you work for a corporation you are subject to their mercy if they will hire you or not. I mean, as a matter of fact, whether you work for anyone is a question of whether they like you or they want you or whether they don't want you, and so trying to find something to be independent, but no matter whether there's a Depression or anything comes that you can survive yourself. I myself had the question of whether the medical field or the dentistry field or the legal field and because of my engineering background, I was able to go to law school without attending any other courses, whereas if I had gone into the medical or dentistry field, I would have taken certain prerequisite courses in biology, chemistry, and so forth, so thereafter I thought I would take a little law and see how I would like it, perhaps even as an engineer (?) would help me, and after I got into law I found law so interesting, one semester led to another, and finally I graduated from Law School. After I graduated from Law School, I took the bar exam and I passed the bar exam and I found myself a free man, you know, and one of the--Judge Stooley, who is the Committee of Fitness for all that district in Illinois in Danville, I had to come before him to be sworn in as a member of the Illinois Bar, and he said to me, he said, "Eddie, I looked for you ever since you were a little kid." He says, "with this act, I have given you a passport into the world," and I don't think a truer word was ever said because after I became a lawyer, I think that it opened up my life and because of my law degree and the profession I had been able to go into many, many fields which I wouldn't have been able to break the ice. NASH: When did you first become involved with the issues of, well, Chinese immigration? HONG: Well, after World War II, I went into serving the war from 1942 in February until my discharge in February, 1946. Then I started practicing law here in New York City, and a lot of Chinese came to me with their problems with questions of immigration and so forth, so therefore being myself a--in the same position, I took a great interest in the problem of immigration, so therefore I studied law and my people's problem channeled me into becoming an immigration expert. So I was the only Chinese lawyer to appear before the New York District of Immigration for many, many years before any other lawyer, Chinese lawyer, came into appear on a case, and I piloted many changes in the immigration law. NASH: (?) HONG: It began (?) with China in 1882, so the agitation of the people from the West saying that the Chinese after they got through using them as laborers building up the railroads and everything else like that that they were a threat to the laborers in the West and so they want to bar any immigration or any Chinese to come to the United States, so therefore they made a treaty with China that no Chinese would come into the United States except as business, a visitor or as a student or a treaty merchant. So in 1892, ten years later after the expiration of the treaty, Congress enacted the law to exclude Chinese completely and this law stayed in the lawbooks until World War II when China became one of the Big Five members and it was a matter of courtesy to recognize them as a big power participating in World War II, they repealed the Chinese Exclusion Act. However, by repealing the Chinese Exclusion Act, they did not make the Chinese an equal citizen. They made them a second-class citizen because they said, well, the Chinese could come in, we're not excluding them, but at that time we had the quota system, and the quota system allowed one hundred five Chinese to come in, and furthermore, even when one hundred five Chinese would come in, the Chinese who are citizens of the United States could not bring in their wives or their minor children into the United States, non-quota, which was given to all the other citizens of the United States, so in cooperation with the Japanese Citizens League, which did a great job in changing the law, I myself on behalf of the Chinese testify and said that it was inequitable to the Chinese and Congress enacted a law in 1948 which repealed that part of the Immigration Act permitting Chinese citizens to bring their wives and children into the United States non-quota, and because of that, and also the fact that the, what is known as the G. I. War Brides Act permitting veterans to bring their wives and children into the United States non-quota, I mean, there's no restriction on them except that their wives and children from the time they are brought into the United States that permitted the Chinese to bring their families and children to the United States so that they could have a normal family life and instead of the old days when all you had were Chinese men or boys because when they couldn't bring their families over the father didn't want to bring anyone over to the United States except somebody who could be a wage earner who could help support the family because the family, the womenfolk and the children were in China, so all they did was bring somebody who could come over here and work, make a little money, whatever they have, then remit that money back to support the family in China, so with the repeal of the discriminating factors as to wives and children, they bring their family over here, they have a normal intercourse of social life and everything else like that. Today instead of a, say, a hundred to one ratio, men to women, we have almost attained equality of the sexes. NASH: Would yo say that the world is no longer discriminatory towards Asians? HONG: No, I don't think the law is discriminating against the Chinese. I think they are, have just as much right as any other ethnic group now immigrating to the United States. NASH: How has the picture of Chinese immigration changed since, oh, let's say, oh, the last twenty-five years? HONG: Well, you can see the changes in New York by the growth of Chinatown. In 1946, Chinatown extended from Mott Street barely to Canal Street, and from Mott Street over to the Bowery. Today I think the Chinese have expanded, Chinatown itself is going almost up to Houston Street, which is, I would say a half mile upward and then in width it has gone over to Broadway and all the way over to the East River. I think the population wise in its growth, I would say at least twenty-five times than when it was in 1946, the amount of, well, to show how it has grown is that there were no Chinese sportswear manufacturers. I think today the Chinese garment manufacturers association is about the second largest group of people involved in the manufacture of sportswear and ladies garment. I think it has taken over the old garment factories that used to be more, I think, Jewish and so forth. I don't think even the Puerto Rican people are as great in number in the garment manufacturing industry as the Chinese women and men. NASH: Do you think that they're exploited? HONG: No, I don't think they're exploited. I think they're hard workers. They work long, but they are industrious. They like to get ahead, nd if you want to get ahead, you have to work hard and then the next person you can't expect to really be like number one without trying harder. NASH: Well, I notice your picture is on a giant mural in Chinatown. How did it happen to get there? HONG: My office is styled on Chatum Square. Chatum Square is a well-known square in New York. It used to be, in the old days, was a center where the, I think, the American Exchange or one of the exchanges used to be there and the First Avenue, Second Avenue, Third Avenue elevator used to converge in that corner and there it divert down to City Hall into South Ferry. About eighteen years ago they had the subway platform in this entire square and then when they took it down, it made this whole square. I think there's about ten streets that converge into this square, and my office happened to be a building right on that square and there's nothing in from of it, nothing, well, I had three open sides, one facing square, one facing Bowery, on facing the (?) and this is exactly where the Bowery begins and I have a six-story building there. There was a big wall there, and a couple of years ago the City Arts Workshop was in the, what they are an organization of artists that try to bring some culture into the City of New York. They saw mt big wall and they asked me if I would consent to give them space to paint a mural on my wall. I says, well, if it's anything for the good of the community, I would be glad to do it, so I gave them the wall, and the theme that they put into the wall was to show the history of the Chinese in America, and if you notice the mural, it shows a big face of an elderly Chinese. It shows a face of a middle-aged Chinese man and his wife and also a child, and then it shows in the background a scene of the (?) Chinese in Wyoming when after the Chinese laborers completed building the railroad the (?), the Chinese is shown of a Chinese elderly man with a lute as some entertainment for him. There's a picture of the railroad showing the Chinese building the railroad. There's a Chinese with a picture of a Chinese woman sewing on a sewing machine showing the fact that a Chinese, modern-day Chinese, are greatly in the garment industry. So it more or less, it left out the Chinese laundryman and the Chinese restaurant people and I have had people complain to me that why didn't the artist include that in the mural, but I said to them, that I had nothing to do with the design of what they were doing. I only donated this space for them to put it there. Well, above the this mural--this mural is about thirty feet by sixty feet. Now above that there's a space about twenty feet by sixty feet which originally I had my--an ad, I would say of my travel agency, my insurance business, in New York. It was in letter form and so last year my sign painter was putting up my sign on the building next to me and he asked me, he said, "Eddie, your sign is peeling. Why don't you do your sign while I got the scaffold up. It will save you a lot of money." I said, "Sure, why not." And so he said what are you going to put on it. I said,put the same thing on it. He said, "Oh, no, let's have something else, so put a slogan on there." So I said, well, all right, I'll think up something, see, and so being that the mural that was done by the City Arts Workshop had several faces, and I thought well, maybe if I put my face on my sign up there, it would harmonize into it, so, and then I thought of a slogan I thought would be nice to say, "You got a friend in Chinatown," so I put that up to my sign man. He said, "Gee, that's nice" and he called an artist and this artist who did my portrait up there happened to be--his name is Emmelio Perez--he's a refugee from Cuba. He's an artist and he painted the big pictures of Castro in Cuba, so he thought it was great and all that, and so he painted my picture and then, so that's how the sign got on the wall there, and I didn't know what the effects would be to people. I mean, I had more comments--favorable comment than disfavorable comment and the Chinese people themselves thought it was good, thought it was at least some Chinese or Chinese person is at least making themself prominent so that the people would know that the Chinese exists. NASH: Is there anything that you would like to say about your experiences as an immigrant in this country? HONG: Well, I would say that, I think I have accomplished as a lawyer I do not say that I want to be a Clarence Darrow or anything of that nature. However, I did embark on the question of trying to bring the Chinese to be non-discriminated against in the matter of immigration and to bring their status up, that they can never be afraid of being deported which I have succeeded and the Chinese have legalized their status. They are now bonafide first class citizens of the United States. They're enjoying all of the benefits of the United States. And I'm also contributed to the development of New York as to the field in which they are engaged in, and I think that through my efforts in changing the immigration law, permitting them to bring the families over which I have brought in four generations of Chinese and I think, I would say from that viewpoint I have attained my goal in my service to the Chinese community and to all the Chinese. I am glad that they can walk around without being, having any fear that the immigration is right behind them and ready to deport them. NASH: Well, thank you very much, Mr. Hong. HONG: Thank you.