ZADORONZNY: And you were born? ISRAEL: I was born in Hungary, 1895, July 6th. And I landed in this country 1910, April, no, pardon me, in March. ZADORONZNY: In March of 1910. ISRAEL: March, 1910. I don't remember the date. ZADORONZNY: Which port did you come from? ISRAEL: New York. ZADORONZNY: You came into New York. ISRAEL: I came into New York. ZADORONZNY: But when you, when you left Hungary . . . ISRAEL: Hungary, well, from Hungary . . . ZADORONZNY: Where did you take the ship? ISRAEL: Well, from Hungary, I had to travel to Germany. ZADORONZNY: Do you remember if you took, where you took the ship from in Germany? ISRAEL: Yeah. In Germany, I took the ship from Bremen. ZADORONZNY: Uh-huh. ISRAEL: From Bremen. Now, traveling in Hungary or Austria was not restricted. I had no need for passports. All I had to have, identification that I'm not a, what you call it, a beggar, or something like it. That's all. ZADORONZNY: Uh-huh. ISRAEL: And if I'm to bring it out as being of a different religion than the country was itself, we had freedom of religion, we were not molested, we were in business. And there were no pogroms I can . . . ZADORONZNY: In Russia. ISRAEL: Like in Russia, Poland or Roumania. We have not, we haven't. We have very good relations with the Christian, the Christian population. We lived together. We worked in the field together, if necessary. And no squabbles. If there was any kind of a misunderstanding about it, it would come to a case to go to a court. It's an odd thing, you know, to try to figure out how understanding could be established in the confidence in people, amongst people. You know, the, I always use the word Gentile and not Catholic . . . ZADORONZNY: Right. ISRAEL: Although it was mostly Catholic. We had Baptists, Episcopalian, you know. So that was the . . . ZADORONZNY: But most were Catholics. ISRAEL: Catholic, yeah. You know, they wouldn't go to the court, to the federal court, like over here. You have a case, you go before a judge. They would go to the rabbi. It's odd, isn't it? ( extraneous background noises increase on the tape ) ZADORONZNY: Yeah. ISRAEL: It's odd. I was very young in those days. After all, I was only fifteen years old when I came here, and there was a lot of cases where a man would sell a cow to a, to a Gentile, and he says, "I promise you that this cow is going to give you so many liters of milk." You know, and of course it didn't work that way. So he went back to the man that sold him the cow. He says, "You give me back my money because the cow doesn't give me that much milk." He says, "How do you feed the cow?" He says, "I feed the cow, give her all to eat she wants, and that's all I get, less than half you promised me." Now, I was maybe probably thirteen years old. ( Ms. Zadoronzny laughs ) It sounds funny, you know. ZADORONZNY: Yeah. ISRAEL: Maybe child stuff. But it impresses, too. And the man says to the other man, and he says to him, "All right. Bring me to court and we'll straighten it out." He says, "No." He says, "We go to your rabbi. Let him straighten it out." He was afraid to go to the rabbi. He was smarter than the, ( he laughs ) well, things like that, you know. But they start getting very tight, little by little. We were preparing for war, and the personal attacks on the person has become so that it was unbearable, and you were just lost. Schools were being curtailed, starting to be neglected, and there was no outlet. It was just like you were in a lost forest. So all youngsters my age, whether I was Jew or Gentile, were trying to leave the country, wherever they want to go. Some went to Germany looking for betterment, or they went to France. And, uh, of course, most of them come to this great country. After all, we know America was the greatest then and the greatest today. And one day I come in and I said to my father and mother, sitting at the table eating, I says, "You know, I'm going to leave for America." My father look at me, he says, "You're only fifteen years old." He says, "Where are you going to travel? You know, that's three thousand miles away?" I says, "Well, I'll go from one train to another train till I get to a boat, and I made it. ZADORONZNY: Are you glad you did? ISRAEL: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. I never regretted it. I'm a veteran of the First World War. And I didn't, if I would not have taken my naturalization papers out to become a citizen, I would not have been in the war, because I was class all of them that come from Austria-Hungary, because we were at war with Austria-Hungary. I would not have been in the army. But as I go back sometimes to look to, I look at it and I said, "If I want to live in this country, which I will live in this country, I want to live with a clean mind." I swear to God. That's the truth today. Nobody's going to fight for me. I'll fight for myself. I'll fight for the country that I adopted it for my, for my future. That's how I got into the army. ZADORONZNY: What were the conditions like on board ship? ISRAEL: Well, it was, well, it was, it was overcrowded, very overcrowded. And it wasn't, they couldn't keep it clean. ZADORONZNY: Too many people. ISRAEL: Too many people, they couldn't. Now, the thing is, you see, when I left my home, we were pretty well-to-do people. Not very rich, but pretty well-to-do. My parents had given me enough money to travel second class. The train second class, the boat second class. And when I'll get to this country, I'll still will have left about forty dollars or so, thirty-five, forty dollars, figure out. And when I got my first ticket in the city Moonkosh [ph], that was a city of about twenty thousand population, and we lived outside of the city about, American miles about five miles. And I went travel like anybody else, third class, you know, to save the difference between second class it was very expensive. And that's how I traveled throughout Hungary. When I came to Budapest, that was the big city of Hungary, so I had there an uncle living, as a matter of fact two uncles, a brother of my father, and a brother of my mother. And I decided that I should go to visit any one of them. But the schedule of the trains leaving didn't permit me. Well, that's what I told you. See, after all, I was only fifteen years old, and the minute was very precious to me. So then I bought a ticket from Budapest to Vienna, and sitting, when the conductor has come collecting the tickets like over here, and he looks at me, he says, "Who have you got in Vienna?" I says, "I have some relatives." That was the truth. Cousins. "Where do they live?" And I, and I go to my pocket and I take out the address. I says, "This is the street they live." He says, "Okay, fine." Of course, he spoke to me German. And I got to Vienna. So when I get to Vienna, so I thought to myself, "Will I go to visit my cousin?" What were their name, first name? I think Roche. I don't remember her name, who she was married to. That was a long time ago. And the cousin, he worked as a, as a trainee for a salesman in a department store. But, again, as I was in the station in Vienna, so they had agents from the ship companies, and he comes over to me, he comes over to me, he says, "You're going to America?" And I says to him, "No." I says, "I'm going to visit some relatives here." He says, "Have you got another story to tell me?" ( Ms. Zadoronzny laughs ) He says, "If you want to," he says, "I have a, arrangements to take over the border into Germany, which was a stone's throw from Austria, Germany. During the city they drive, you know, nobody stops you. The only time they stop you, who you come actually to the border. And he says, "You don't give me anything now, but when I get you into Germany, that was up there where they got you and they send you back to your home." And I, well, I had nothing to lose, as long as it doesn't cost me anything, et cetera. And I asked him, "How much is it going to cost me when you get me over the border?" The border was in Switzerland. That was a stone's throw, actually. He says, "It's going to cost you twenty-five gulden." That's like twenty-five dollars. Well, it was less because the money was a different value, you know. I gave him twenty-five gulden, but I gave him the twenty-five gulden when I was in Switzerland safe. But from there I went to Germany. That was a cinch. ZADORONZNY: And then you got the boat to come here. ISRAEL: Yep. ZADORONZNY: How was the treatment here on Ellis Island? ISRAEL: Well, I could tell, what I could remember, it couldn't be kept clean, as I could tell you. It couldn't be kept clean. It was impossible. ZADORONZNY: On the ship, or here in the building? ISRAEL: In the building. ZADORONZNY: The building wasn't clean. ISRAEL: Well, the ship, in the ship we were laying in hammocks. There was cots, well, berths, double berths, maybe even triple. I don't remember too much either. But they also have hammocks in the ships. It wasn't easy. It wasn't easy. ZADORONZNY: And then when you got here was it crowded? ISRAEL: Oh, it was crowded. You didn't know where to sit. And if you wanted to sit, it was dirty, you know. You take children, and some of them, excuse me for the expression, you couldn't go to a toilet. ZADORONZNY: Because that was in 1910, before they made some changes in the building. ISRAEL: That was in 1910. And nobody could complain, and I didn't know any, I didn't know, well, you know, that you could pull a lever and flush the toilet, you know, and something like it, you know, and neither did, the others didn't know. But I was well-behaved anyway. ZADORONZNY: Did the inspectors ask you many questions? ISRAEL: The what? ZADORONZNY: Did the inspectors ask you many questions? ISRAEL: No, no, no. They, they checked, well, first of all, doctors examined me, whether there's anything wrong with me. And, uh, naturally with the filth they see a louse creeping on you here, creeping up, so they have to spray me, that was the least of the whole thing. Well, they asked me, "What are you going to do in America? Why did you come here?" I says, "Like anybody else, I'll make money, look for a job. (?)" You see? And I don't think about it. I had a hard time. Very hard time. It wasn't easy. At the beginning you do your job. ZADORONZNY: Were you in and out of this facility in one day, you didn't have to stay? Did you have to stay at all? ISRAEL: In one, when? ZADORONZNY: When you came off the ferry here to Ellis Island . . . ISRAEL: Well, we, well, they took us off the boat that docked in New York. ZADORONZNY: Right. ISRAEL: Harbor, whatever you call it, berth. ZADORONZNY: And then you came out here on a ferry? ISRAEL: On a ferryboat, yeah. ZADORONZNY: And then it, you were in the building for a few hours, and then you were allowed to leave? ISRAEL: No, no. I was in here two days, maybe it was three days. A brother supposed to come, a brother was supposed to come and take me, meet me, take me off. ZADORONZNY: So you were waiting for him to come? ISRAEL: Yeah, yeah. He did come, but they had to do something with me. I don't remember what it was, whether I was filthy, lousy or what, and they had to clean me out, which I don't blame them. They did it to everybody. And that's all, when they brought me over. And then was to get a job. So I got a job polishing caps on soda bottles. You know the old fashioned soda bottles with the thing? But I couldn't fill them because it was too dangerous for me to do it. ZADORONZNY: The seltzer bottles. ISRAEL: The seltzer bottles, yeah. So I polished the seltzer bottles. And I worked sixty hours a week, and they gave me sixty dimes. ZADORONZNY: Sixty cents a, ten . . ? ISRAEL: Ten cents an hour. ZADORONZNY: Oh, my goodness. ISRAEL: Yeah. I didn't know what to . . . ZADORONZNY: Money bought a lot more in those days than it does today. ISRAEL: It wasn't easy. They say everything was cheap. Regardless how cheap it was, you never could make enough to buy food. ZADORONZNY: When you left Ellis Island, was your brother living in New York City or . . . ISRAEL: He lived in New York City. He was, he was a, he learned a trade in Budapest. He was a diamond setter, a jeweler, and he had a pretty good job. ZADORONZNY: That still is a good job. ( she laughs ) ISRAEL: Yeah, it was a good job. I think he made about twenty-two or twenty-four dollars a week. It wasn't enough for the work he has done. Well, I don't know. It's a pretty hard thing to say. You know, you know one thing that baffles me today at my age, and I get into a disagreement a lot with my wife about it, why is it that they look down on an American worker? You know? Why they look down (?). It's his fault, everything's his fault. Why not look up to him and give him credit that he accomplished it, and he does accomplish it, that he wants a little more, he's entitled to it. He produces, he's a producer. ( an airplane can be heard in the background ) ZADORONZNY: He's willing to work. ISRAEL: He works, he's willing to work. The pride he has is being destroyed in him. Forget about it. My wife tells me I talk too much. We are married fifty-eight years. ZADORONZNY: Oh, God bless you. ISRAEL: Oh, she's all right. ZADORONZNY: Mr. Israel, I want to thank you for giving us this interview and talking with us. ISRAEL: I talk too much. ZADORONZNY: No, you don't. It's wonderful. Thank you.