NASH: Today's date is October 26, 1973. I am speaking with Mrs. Freida Jenofsky who was born in Russia in the year 1904 and came to this country in 1920 [sic] at the age of seventeen. Mrs. Jenofsky, would you like to tell us a little bit about where you come from. What is the name of it? JENOFSKY: I was born in a little town that is called Gritsev and the state was Valenagaberna, which means the "state," during a very hard period, especially for Jewish people. My father left the country because we had nothing to live on. He had family in the United States and they sent him a ticket and he came to this country. A couple years after he left the First World War broke out and we were stranded there in this town and since there was nothing to live on because the fighting armies, the Germans, the Polish, and the Russians were in and out of the town so we left the town, my mother, my sister and I, went to a village where there we were able to survive. We raised all our vegetables, food, chickens, ducks and we had our own cow, which really was the one that we were able to survive, physically. After the war had ended, war was ended '17 but we didn't hear from out father until 1920. We received a letter through the Jewish Joint Distribution, we received a letter from Warsaw that there is money and the tickets for us to come to the United States. When we finally got to Warsaw on very hard times, we had to wait for about six months until the visas and the papers, and all the documents that were necessary for us to come to the United States, were made. We left around, let me see, in the fall, let's say sometimes in September, I would think. We left our town and came to Warsaw and we stayed there for, yes I think I said this already and finally when we got our papers and everything worked out, we left for the boat. I remember the name was "Finlandia," "Finland," and we got to Germany, Berlin, where we stayed over and there was the same Joint Distribution, the same organization that took care of us there. And from there we went to Belgium, stayed in Belgium for two weeks under a quarantine. All our clothes, everything was quarantined. And after this we boarded the boat, which I mentioned, "Finlandia," and on the sea, probably right in the high sea, for about four or five days and suddenly somebody said we are going back. We found out that some engine was broke in the boat and we went back to Southampton. That is where we started out from in the first place. And the boat was repaired and we boarded the ship again and we came to New York to Ellis Island. 1921, the date was 19... NASH: May 10th? JENOFSKY: May 10th, it was seven days earlier which maybe it was May 3rd. May 3rd, that's right. We came to Ellis Island on May 3rd and again we had to go through the whole procedure of quarantine, of going through all the clothes to be quarantined and we had to be bathed in very filthy, small tubs. I must say that, which I think that anybody didn't have any disease could had gotten it there. And the reason probably why we had to be seven days, I don't remember, but my father came to meet us but for some reason he got lost. So by the time we found each other, it took probably--that was the difference between seven days. It was May 10th that we got to Philadelphia. NASH: What else do remember about Ellis Island? JENOFSKY: Ellis Island was cold in those days. For some people, I wouldn't say for everybody, for some people it was a joy. People came there for either their husbands or fathers or brothers, whoever they had and they came and if nothing was wrong with them, they just went with their families to the various homes. But on the other hand, it was for some people, it was called the "Heartbreak," the "Island of Heartbreak" or the "Island of Tears," that was what it was called because lots of families came, they were very poor, they came from poverty. Most of these that came here came on account of poverty and some of them had some diseases. Some of them had trachoma which they would not allow. Those that had it would not be allowed. Those that had even certain scabs or something in their heads, every head had to be examined, including my own. And if they found something, either some scab on the head or something not clean on their body or some infection or something, and let's say there were--there were some, I remember, there was a family of four and a family of five. The husband was in this country--left previously and came to meet them. So one child, four were alright, one child had some kind of a disease, I don't recall what it is, and they wanted to send--not that they wanted, they had to go back. And that is why it was called the Island Tears because I remember the tragedy. Everybody was crying. I can even cry now when I think of it. Here is a family of five and four children and the mother can come and one child has to be sent back, and that was the tragedy of Ellis Island at that time. And another family that I remember that the mother, the children were alright, but the mother had some problem. I don't recall exactly, but it was TB was the next thing. Anybody that had TB had to go back. I don't recall exactly whether she had TB or she had some kind of disease, and the mother had to be sent back. And here is the family, break up the family. So these instances I think, as long as I live I will never forget them. NASH: Do you remember anybody like social workers or religious representatives coming to Ellis Island? JENOFSKY: Yes. Yes, these representatives that would come, I don't remember exactly whether they were from HIAS. The HIAS, if you know, did an awful lot. The fact is the HIAS did an awful lot for the immigrants. Now some of these people that were found with some kind of a disease or infection or whatever it is, they tried to cure them, they wanted to send this minute right back. Some of them had to go back, but some of them who had been cured--for instances, trachoma was not a curable thing and I don't think they allowed anybody to come in. TB was the second thing, but there were other kind of minor disease which the immigrants were stopped, they were not allowed to come in, so they were trying to cure them, to get doctors to do it. They did a lot of things to eliminate some of the things which divided families. This is as far as I can remember things. There were lots of other things if you would ask me. NASH: Well, what was it like to sleep on Ellis Island? JENOFSKY: Well, it wasn't very comfortable, I can assure you that. But the sleeping part wasn't--the hope, the hope that you are coming to a country and the imagination that people had that you come to a country with plenty and riches and everybody gets rich and everybody gets all the nice things, was a disappointment. It was a very disappointment. Now we had no problem as far as our family. My mother, my sister, we came, we had no problem. We had no disease, we had nothing, very healthy. But we came to a father who was a worker and he wasn't really a young man at the time and he wasn't earning too much and he couldn't keep us all up so we had to go to work. And you were not brought up, as hard times as we had, but we were not used to the factory, we didn't know factory life. We worked in the garden outside and raising vegetables and things in Russia, but we were not--I am speaking now from my personal life because lots of people came from different sections of the country and maybe they had different experiences, but I am speaking for my family. We came here, my sister and I, had to go to a factory and it was very hard because we were not used to being in a factory and the salary, the wages, that were paid were so minimal that I remember, that for quite a long time, I was the one that was working, made seven dollars a week, and had to support a family because there were some family problems and we were not able to get any other income so we had to go to work. And for quite a long time. That's how I happened to get in the sweater industry. Somehow a man who had a little factory making sweaters gave me a job and I worked and a good deal of support, these seven dollars--well, things were so cheap that for seven dollars you bought more then than you buy for seventy dollars now. This is true. Well, there are a lot of things I can't remember. I would like to. NASH: What was your experience? You said you were in a union. What do you remember about being in a union? JENOFSKY: Well, the union was an important thing because once you got into the union--there were very big hardships for getting--I know that I was the one trying to help to organize the sweater union, for instance. I think the dressmakers union had already a union at the time, but the sweaters didn't. This was the, what do you call them, the textile industry that the sweaters got into, and, you know, as all the manufacturers did not like a union, did not want it, and I remember we had a hard time in my small way to help to organize a union because after the union was organized wages went, probably doubled or tripled after that. But when there was no union and people when immigrants came and they had nothing to live on, they had to work for whatever the manufacturers paid and I suppose it is in human nature that they are not willing to consider human beings, that they have to make a living, but how much profit they can make out of their industrial endeavor. I think this is putting it in a mild way. NASH: Were you involved in strikes? JENOFSKY: I will tell you one incident. My sister worked at dresses and I worked, as I told you, at sweaters. At that time the dressmaker union had a strike and it was a very bitter strike. The fact is they couldn't even picket. You know what a strike is, you go picketing, outside, not to let any workers, or they used to call them "scabs," they still call them that, not to get in because once scabs caved in they lost their strike. So one morning I remember I went to help my sister's union in her picket because the people were so tired that some of them got sick, some of them had no strength to go picketing. At that time already, I had a friend who was a furrier and he made me a fur coat. It was a seal, you know, it wasn't very expensive, but at that time it was fancy. It was very cold outside so naturally I put it on and as I came to the picket line the police were surrounding the pickets. They didn't get a chance to picket too much. So when the cops saw me in this fur coats he thought I was a bystander, he told me to get out. So everybody was arrested. I was the only one that walked away because I had a fur coat on. Because he thought I was just passing by and got involved into this. This is the experience I had as far as a strike. Yes, I don't remember that I was too much involved in strikes, but I know about it because I know, as I told you, my sister was involved and a lot of people and friends that I knew that were involved and sometimes they used to help out one another. You know, and the people that had to go on the picket line were exhausted, friends would ask friends to come and help us instead, if they wouldn't come, somebody else came. But it was a big struggle to organize the union. It didn't come easy. Very hard, and some of these people were arrested. Some of them were even killed. The American unions, the trade unions, and I am not going to speak of the steel workers because I don't know anything about it, but the needle trades, didn't come easy. A lot of blood was shed, a lot of people died, a lot of people were shot. There were gangsters like they have today, they had in that time, too. There were gangsters that used to shoot the strikers, shoot the people and some people died. You know that some of the great writers, now Jewish writers, I can mention for instance, who came here young. They were not operators or tailors or anything. They had to become here, they had to struggle. And you know something, at that time when you went to look for a job, I didn't experience that, but I know that those who told me that you had to bring your machine. There were no elevators and the buildings were tall and they had to walk some four, five, six, even ten flights, bring their own machine, you know, to be able to work. And this is how exploitation and sweat shops, that's why they called them sweat shops at the time, this is how--and the unions didn't come easy. There was a lot of bloodshed until the people organized the unions, those that became (?) and any of these people, they were workers when they came. NASH: I have heard it said that the, let's say the apparel industry is primarily Jewish in membership and in leadership. JENOFSKY: Used to be, not anymore. NASH: Well, I was speaking of, let's say up until lately. Why do you think that is? Why do you think that it was controlled and made up of Jews? JENOFSKY: Well, at the beginning when the Jews came in, they opened up a little shop, used to say "shopka," a little tailoring, and then when we started working and business started to increase he started taking people. And who did he take in, those people that he knew. And then little by little these became--shops, became factories of producing. Then another thing that was at that time, when one, let's say from our town came a man and he little by little brought himself up and he had a little factory. He needed workers and then in his town the people that were left were still poor and starving there and having the Czarist Russia at the time and the problems and everything and they didn't want to go into the army either, for that matter, so they used to bring them over, pay for their ticket, bring him over, and put them in there in their factory. So they already became, and they had to submit to all kinds of exploitation because he brought them over, he paid for his ticket. They may have had to work, I don't know, maybe ten times as much than the ticket was worth. And this was how, actually this is the history of the Jewish trade unions. I don't mean the unions, I mean the clothing workers unions. This is how they started it. They took in those that came over, they gave them jobs, and they thought they did them a big favor. And then they used to bring over (?) people (?) will bring them in and he gave him a job and so naturally he had to work as little as he wanted to pay him because he did him a big favor, he brought him over. And that's where the struggle started and that's where the organization started, and sometimes the brothers and sisters, who their older brother say was here and established himself and had a factory and brought them over, they were striking and fighting against them. I have here a book recently "Nine Brothers," by Raboy, and he tells the story of what happened when first of all he came himself. No, no, two brothers, his older brothers, came before and they became furriers and they established and they started little by little, they opened a little fur shop. Then they brought all the family. There were nine brothers. They brought the family father, so the father was taken in, the brothers were taken in, but they were the bosses because they were the ones that owned and they were the ones that brought them over and they exploited their own and here this one, he writes he goes on strike and his brothers go on strike against their own brothers, against their own father, because the father was taken in as a courtesy, the father became already one of the bosses. NASH: Do you think that people, not just the unions, but do you think that people helped each other more in those days? JENOFSKY: Yes. They organized, you know, they had the "Workman's Circle," you have probably heard about it. These are the fraternal organizations. They were different kinds, there were the National...the, what is it, (?), the Nationalists, the Zionist organization. Then there was the "Working Mans Circle." Then later on there was an organization IWO, during the McCarthy times they were abolished. NASH: IWW? JENOFSKY: No, IWW were also fighters, but that was in a different industry. NASH: What is the IWO? JENOFSKY: It was called the "International Workers Order." That was not something like the Working Circle, from different, from a more liberal, more progressive, would call them? They organized (?), the International Workers Order, and the Working Man's Circle. The Working Mans Circle was older. They started first and then they couldn't get along and they split and then they made another one. And this is as far as I know about this. NASH: Well, let's just say on a person to person basis, did people feel more connected with each other? JENOFSKY: Yes, that is what I call fraternal. Not only that you had the insurance, we still have some insurance that we were--they had insurance, they had fraternity. They used to come together and enjoy themselves because they were as came off they were farmers. Especially from the very beginning they didn't know the language. It was very hard. I remember my own--when you don't know the language and you come in and people are talking or laughing, you think they are laughing at you or something. You don't know what. So it was a hard time. So these organizations were not only insurance, but they also were fraternal. They made the people, socially they would come together, socialize, lead a social life. Otherwise they were foreigners and they were strangers. Some of them never came to Brighton, didn't know how to get to Brighton. You know, if you'd look back, what was it, there was a day it used to take from a day or two to come to Coney Island because the transportation was so bad. And then some of them didn't even know how to get came from small town. They didn't have fare. Even if it was five cents, they didn't have the five cents to go. I remember one of the comedians, a Jewish comedian, told the story that when they had to go to Coney Island what is his name now? NASH: (?) JENOFSKY: No, no. NASH: Jack (?)? JENOFSKY: No, he was a teacher. NASH: Sam Levinson? JENOFSKY: Sam Levinson tells the story. Sam Levinson tells the story that the mother gave him lunches and gave them five cents each or ten cents each to go back and forth. It was really not that early and when they came to Coney Island and then he was very thirsty so he spent a nickel and then couldn't get home so he got into--so he is pushing the (?) in front of a woman, so the driver thought it was the old woman so she had to get off the train because the boy got in and he thought that the woman--so she was thrown off the train on account of that. And in the beginning it is very hard for the immigrants and they had to have these organizations, a life necessity for them. Otherwise they didn't know where to go, they were lonely, they couldn't afford to go anyplace. NASH: Do you think people who were immigrants, do you think that that is an important part of their life now? What I really want to know is do you think that people talk to each other now about their experiences in those days? JENOFSKY: Why sure they do, sure they do, and sometimes, not frequently, but let's say sometimes you get together with your family, with your friends, and at the present time we don't live richly, but we are not poor. We have the necessities of life and we go to the theater and we go to a library and go to a museum, but there were times when a nickel was an awful lot of money and you couldn't afford to go someplace because you needed something to but--even if you got three rolls for a nickel, but you needed three rolls. I remember I had that experience once that we-- I was already married and my husband wasn't--this was in 1929 in the big crash and all this, and I had a little girl and he wasn't working and here you had to buy three rolls but you had to have five cents to go look for a job. You had to travel and it was very important or else you wanted to buy something and the child needed a pair of shoes so we couldn't afford to do other things that we wanted to, let's say to go visiting somebody. I couldn't spend the ten cents because I needed just enough to buy the shoes for the child. So if you think times are bad now, and they are, in general, I mean, believe me, I'm not going to go in politics and political situation what is going on now, but economically they say the good ole times, no they weren't good ole times. In a way maybe we didn't have so much trouble and so much graft and so much other things. We didn't have Watergate at the time to worry about. END SIDE ONE BEGINNING SIDE TWO NASH: Do you think that people were more sentimental then? In other words, do you think people had more feelings about other people? JENOFSKY: I think so. I think so because the situation was such. There were families, there were friends. The gathering together, families or whatever. There are families now too and they make all those bigger just with last Sunday the bar mitzvah, and probably spent ten thousand dollars, which to me it is a waste of money. If I had it I would never do it. But at that time there was more fraternity, social life revolved mostly on family, on friends. Not so much on extravagance and spending too much money, but from getting together or go to the park, was a big event to go to the park and have a picnic and bring all the food and having a wonderful time. I think they had a better time than when they go to see some of these rotten movies that I can't stand. So I think in a way it was more, socially it was more friendly, the children were more obedient to parents. I don't know, I am trying to think why do the children now days become much more trouble with their children. There wasn't so much trouble at that time. Children knew they had to be in time to go to bed and go to school and there was especially, and I as Jewish, I must say that, there was a terrific drive for education. Everybody that came from the old country, maybe some of them could hardly sign their name, didn't get a chance, but here they went to school and some of them became doctors and some of them became--you know something, most of the Jewish children nowadays, none of them are factory workers or (?) workers. They are all doctors and lawyers and scientists and what not. The theatrical field is mostly, I wouldn't say controlled, but a good deal of them are most of the Jewish boys that came out of tailors operators or big shots in the theatrical industry or the movie industry or in the law industry or whatever they have--they made it because the people. You know something, these people that came, they were so poor, they worked so hard, the aspiration was that the children have to be educated and become professionals and they did. Most of the, I can't figure out myself why is it that in those times the children were obedient to parents to a certain extent. They had to go to school and there was no other way out of it. They had to be in school and they had to be educated and the aspiration of the education. I am talking about myself. I came here, I had some education there, but being raised during the war times and the revolutionary times, didn't get a chance. The first thing I came, even if I went to work, I still went to school. I went to elementary and naturally I had to because I didn't know the language. I had to go to elementary school, I graduated from there. I have both certificates. Then I went to high school and I was working already. It wasn't easy, but I came as I say '21, 1924 I got my high school certificate. I made it in sort of three or four years, about four years or so I made it, and it was hard work, it wasn't easy, because I had to make a living. NASH: Do you think that the fact that maybe in those well, I won't ask you if you think--I think that in those days probably children had more responsibilities and they knew that something was expected of them and for that reason probably were more obedient because they were treated in some ways with more respect, and these days, today children, they have no responsibilities really. Just watch television, go to school and go to bed. JENOFSKY: You are right. I would come back to Levinson, he said, "How is it that a boy of sixteen is too young to go to work but old enough to drive a car?" I think maybe the parents contributed to their delinquency. I think so too because the children have to be given some responsibility. The parents go to work and they give them as much money as they--they don't need that much and they go out and they go wild. You know, when they have no responsibility. Everybody has to have some responsibility. That is why there are so many out of school. Why are they out of school? Isn't it easier to be at school than to run around. But there is some laxity on the parents' part perhaps. There isn't that idealism or that aspiration. The children have got to become professionals, they have to be able not to struggle. We all say, "I don't want my child," we all say that, all the immigrants, that I don't want my child to struggle the way I did. Maybe this is what contributed to their delinquency. NASH: The next generation didn't struggle as much as you did and they weren't so afraid. They didn't have that memory. JENOFSKY: It wasn't a question of fear, it was question of being somebody, of getting something, of promoting yourself to somebody, not to just become--you know, in Yiddish history, Jewish history, throughout the ages and as much as I have studied it, there is that feeling that you got to be educated. A Jew that has no education is a nobody. Education is the most important thing. Throughout the history when the Jews won their spurs, were the Jewish men used to work around from village to village. I remember in our village there was a man who was poor like a mouse and the children, they brought a teacher into the village, there were several children, they brought a teacher and the teacher himself couldn't be paid because they didn't have the money, but the villain is the interest, the aspiration to have their children education. That is why I suppose the Jews are called the "people of the book." The aspiration of the Jewish people, and this is throughout history, you have to be educated even if you are a worker, you have to be an educated worker. NASH: Is there anything you would like to say, anything else you would like to say before we close? JENOFSKY: Well, I don't know. I think I have told you quite a few things. Maybe I forgot something. Maybe you want to ask me something. Do want to ask something that is of interest to you? NASH: No, I think it has all been very interesting. JENOFSKY: I want to express my appreciation to you and to whoever sent you, whether it is the Immigration or whatever. NASH: Museum. JENOFSKY: Museum. I want to express my appreciation and my interest also and my satisfaction that this museum was built to memorialize the contribution that the--all the immigrants made, especially the Jewish people. These are special, it is not that I think that Jewish people contributed more than any other people, but because I am Jewish and I know more about it than the rest of them. I went through the museum and I took down practically all the important personalities on a notebook, what they contributed, and I feel that even perhaps the English were the largest immigrants, the largest number of immigrants to this country and there are others, but each ethnic group, I would call it maybe, this is what I want to say. Each ethnic group, I mean nationality, now they use the word ethnicity, those that come from a different--there is word for it, I can't think of it, those that come from a different educational or national origin, but I think all the immigrants going through the museum have made a great contribution to this country and made this country great as it is. I think the trouble that we are having now, these people who have put our country now in certain disgrace, I would say, for other countries to see what is going on, and especially I am having in mind the Watergate situation, the other situations that I think that these people will look past, will go away and those that made the great contributions that made this country great will survive and that our country will become again what it was, the dream of all the immigrants that came to this country. And I would only say about the criticism of the Jewish Museum that they should have put in more, as I said before, artistic--this is what I missed at the museum, is the paintings because since all the industrialists here, the Germans for instance, those of the Steinways, the Frankfurters, those that contributed a great deal to this country and the Jews contributed in their field a lot. So this is one of the things that I admired, but I think it is not enough. I think that they would also, and also, as I said before, the Statue of Liberty and Emma Lazarus, the poet who eternalized, I think with her sonnet, The New Colossus, the greatness of this country as she says, "Come you tired, huddled masses-- I don't remember exactly her sonnet. I think there should be more popularized, perhaps said more about her contribution to the Jewish immigrancy, because she did a great deal for the Jewish, especially for the Jewish immigrants, her contribution to the Jewish immigrants and her contribution as an artist, as a poet. And I think that the history, how the Statue of Liberty came here, how it was brought in in pieces and how it was here for a number of years and then the famous publisher, Pulitzer, who has published an appeal to all the poets and writers that they should contribute to the inscriptions of the Statue and being that it took years until this was done and finally Emma Lazarus won and we happen to be, as far as I am concerned, very proud that she was a Jewish poet and she made this contribution to the everlasting of our country welcoming every immigrant that is still coming into this country. NASH: Thank you very much Mrs. Jenofsky.