PHILLIPS: This is Andrew Phillips and I’m with Mr. Ken Johnson on the 24th of March 1989 on a Friday, Good Friday, in fact and we’re beginning the interview at about 10 to 11. Mr. Johnson is from Britain and, Mr. Johnson, what year was your date of immigration. JOHNSON: It was 1929, Andrew. We came over, we left the 29th of March and got here in April in 1929. PHILLIPS: Let’s start, perhaps, you were only, I thin, uh, what year were you born? JOHNSON: I was born in 1923, so I was really, I was just five and a half, between five and a half and six when I came over with my mother and dad. And I was the only child, it was just the three of us that came over here. PHILLIPS: What I’d like to do first, perhaps, is to get some sense of your background in Britain to understand what led up to the immigration. JOHNSON: Well, my mother came from a large family. My dad was a carpenter who worked in a tram factory in England, and he also was an excellent pianist. And one of my mother’s sisters, my Aunt Nell, lived in Aurora, which is near Chicago here, and her husband was my Uncle Joe who was a, is a Congregational minister. And they told my folks about how good things were over here and convinced them, uh, what it really turned out to be was my aunt was quite lonely over here. So, and my dad had a lot of talent and it didn’t look like he was going to get beyond working in the tram factory. So they decided to pick up stakes and to come over here directly to Aurora to be with her sister and to see what other work my dad could get into. So that really was what started the whole thing. Discussion went on for a couple of years and finally Mom and Dad decided to make the break and they were both in their early thirties at the time, decided to come over and make the big plunge and relocate in the United States. PHILLIPS: You say you had relatives in Aurora. JOHNSON: Yes. My aunt and uncle and their children, who were my cousins, who are now spread over all the country, but those are the only relatives we had over here. PHILLIPS: Why had they immigrated to the United States? JOHNSON: Well, they had immigrated quite a few years before. Both my aunt and uncle are passed on now. Some of their cousins are still alive, but they immigrated mainly because my uncle was a Congregational minister and, uh, and really he was just kind of a pioneer here. He had been a minister in Russia during World War One and the Revolution and just barely got out with his life, and he was a man who liked travel. He was very outgoing and articulate. They had no relatives over here but had an offer from a church, would you believe, in Fargo, North Dakota. And so they came over and went right to Fargo, North Dakota with a large family, with a number of children, they’ve got four or five children, and it was quite a strenuous experience for my aunt because coming from England and going to Fargo, NOrth Dakota in the middle of winter is a pretty rough experience. But then they gradually, he got churches, and gradually moved down to Aurora near Chicago and then that’s when we joined them, really. And it was difficult. It was during the Depression, which my folks didn’t really appreciate. And my mother and dad did a lot of work, which they had not been used to doing. My mother was the janitor for my uncle’s church and my dad worked in grocery stores and was a janitor in a school. They were very proud people and never went on relief. They were only making about fifteen dollars a week between them for a number of years. Which is probably one of the reasons why I’m the only child and I’m really the one that benefitted the most. Although my dad, uh, just to make it very brief, my dad, I was very proud of Dad because he got his college education over here. When I was in the army in the Philippines during World War Two he got his degree and was in the top ten percent of his class and became a YMCA secretary, and was a YMCA secretary both in Aurora and Chicago for many years. PHILLIPS: What did he study? JOHNSON: Well, he just, it was a basic business administration, a bachelor of arts degree. And he had been working at the YMCA as a janitor, but because of his talent in playing the piano and getting his degree, the general secretary brought him up and made him program secretary, and then he became an accredited YMCA secretary. And I was very proud of him. When I was in the Philippines in the infantry I got a picture of him in his cap and gown in 1945 when he graduated. And of course when my folks came over here they became citizens as soon as they could, and I’ve still got their naturalization papers in 1937 when they became citizens. And I look upon my folks as, uh, as with many immigrants, as being people that really contributed to this country. I think they both worked hard, they were honest, people with a lot of integrity and good class of immigrant. And I’ve done my best to follow in their footsteps. PHILLIPS: I’d like to go back, I’d like to understand a little bit more about why they left Britain. But before I do that I’d like to go back to your uncle, who sounds like a fascinating character. JOHNSON: He was a very interesting man. PHILLIPS: He sounds like a missionary. He was a missionary, I take it. That’s why he was in Russia? JOHNSON: That’s why he was in Russia. But when he, when he... PHILLIPS: I’d like to ga back before why, if you know, why or how he got to the Soviet Union or to Russia, as it was then. JOHNSON: I’m not too sure. I know that he, actually he was an interesting man. He got a degree. PHILLIPS: What was his name? JOHNSON: Reverend Clare, C-L-A-R-E. Reverend Joseph Clare. He got his, uh, he got a degree in mechanical engineering at Liverpool University and then he went ahead and got his, uh, what do you call it in the ministry, his D.D.D., Doctor of Divinity, and somehow or other, I’m not sure, I don’t really recall as to how they got over to Russia. PHILLIPS: What denomination was this? JOHNSON: Congregational. And he was Congregational, I think, as far as I know, except years later, during World War Two, he and my aunt moved to, uh, he also was a teacher in Aurora. He was, in additional to his ministry at the Congregational church, he was a substitute teacher in mathematics and English at the high school. He founded the Community Concert Series in Aurora to bring artists into our community. He also founded, he also raised money for uniforms for the band, was very active in the community. On WJJD Radio in Chicago he also had a children’s show in the morning. And, uh, so he was very, and he also, when I was gong to college, he taught me calculus, and I worked with him many evenings on my problems. He was a very interesting individual. PHILLIPS: You sound like you were very close to him. JOHNSON: Well, we were fairly close to him. We always lived close to the family and, uh... PHILLIPS: Did he talk about the Soviet Union before the Revolution, his departure? JOHNSON: Not very much. He had a church there, he had, I’m assuming it was probably a Protestant or a Congregational church as well, and they really, stayed there beyond when they should have done. This was at the time of Rasputin and the time of the Revolution. They like the people very much, they had a good church, and I think two of his children were born in Russia. I’m trying to remember where this was. I think it was in Leningrad, which was called Petrograd at that time, I think. And, but all I know is that they just managed to escape and got out of the country as the Revolution was going on there. PHILLIPS: And they escaped not back to Britain? JOHNSON: Yes, they went back to England. PHILLIPS: And stayed there. I think they came over here in about ‘21 or ‘22. PHILLIPS: Now, was he sent over here or did he, too, immigrate to the United States? JOHNSON: He, too, immigrated with the family, right. At the time when I came over, even though I was only five and a half... PHILLIPS: So he was, he was your father or your mother’s... JOHNSON: He was my uncle. His wife was my mother’s sister. My Aunt Nell was my mother’s sister. And she had a family, it was a family of nine. And, uh, my mother and my Aunt Nell were the only two that came over to this country. But we’ve propagated the clan a little bit. I have two children and a granddaughter. And all of my Aunt Nell’s children got married and are strung out from the East Coast to California with numerous second cousins and whatnot. My mother’s maiden name was Elam, which is a good old English name. PHILLIPS: Can you spell it for me, please? JOHNSON: E-L-A-M. And there are a number of Elams in this country. It’s not a very common name. My dad, who’s name obviously was Johnson, his father was Prussian, his mother was Swedish. So I’ve got a combination of English, Swedish and German on that side of the family. My mother’s side of the family goes back in England for many, many generations. PHILLIPS: So you decided, or your parents decided... JOHNSON: Parents decided, yeah. PHILLIPS: To come back, to come to the United States to try it out, or to immigrate, because life didn’t offer much opportunity for someone there. JOHNSON: That’s right. Basically that was it. They were hoping that there would be more opportunities for my dad, which it was eventually, as I mentioned to you in the YMCA, you know. But this was back in 1930 and there were many hard years during the Depression. PHILLIPS: Why did they, did they ever talk about that decision to immigrate despite the fact that there was a Depression happening? JOHNSON: I think the problem was, you know, it’s not like today with television and everything, my folks never really realized how bad the Depression was. And my uncle, being a minister and always having a job. And also because he wanted my mother to come over because my aunt was lonely, never really told us how bad things were, and told us that he could get my dad a job and that there would be, that there were so many more benefits to the country over here, that he just really convinced them that they should come over. And my parents only had four hundred dollars between them when they came over with me and my dad used most of that buy some carpenter’s tools. And then he had a lot of difficulty getting jobs. I remember one period of a few months he had a job in Batavia which was about five or six mile away and he walked there and back every morning because he didn’t have enough money to ride the bus. And very difficult times for a number of years. But I always admired them. They never really got enough money together to go back to England, so they were kind of stuck over here and had to make a go of it. And they never got back to England. I did a number of times. Never got back to England before they passed away, which was just recently. But, uh, I always felt bad about that. But we always wrote tons of letters. During World War Two, and I was in the Pacific, I never got to England, my mother sent food packages and stuff every week over to my Aunt Ivy and the relatives in England, who went through some very bad times during the War with the bombings and the buzz bombs and all of that. PHILLIPS: What sort of food did she send? Do you remember? JOHNSON: I’m trying to remember, because she sent me food on the other side, and they had to wait in many lines and they had food stamps. She’d try and send non-perishable foods and things that, even like sugar and tea. What they had in England most of the time during the war was potatoes and lamb or things like that, but she tried to send over candy or foods that they didn’t have on a regular basis. They kept this up long after the war ended, too. PHILLIPS: Just go back a little bit. Tell me about your arrival at Ellis Island. Tell me about the journey by... JOHNSON: Okay. The boat trip I remember very vividly. It was on the Caronia, which was a twenty thousand ton Cunard ship. And we left out of Liverpool, which at that time was still a major port. And it took us almost twelve days. And I remember the trip vividly for two or three reasons. First of all, my mother and I were sick the whole way over. My dad never got seasick. He was in World War One and was given up for dead a couple of times in Turkey, and that’s another whole story in itself, but he never got seasick. A good friend of his was the chief steward on the ship. and because my dad could play the piano there was one night when they asked him to go down, they had a grand piano in the dining room, in the main ballroom, the dining room. They asked him to play the piano for the people for dinner. And Dad went down there and there was only about three people in the dining room because everybody was sick. And there was a big storm on and while he was playing the piano the boat went up about thirty degrees and all the, all the moorings broke on the piano and it flew across the dining room into another wall. I even remember that quite vividly. The only time we weren’t sick was when we spent a day at Halifax in Nova Scotia. It was very rough crossing, extremely bad storms, and we were very worried. So it’s the kind of trip you remember. We hardly ever got up on deck because the winds were blowing so strong. PHILLIPS: How many days did it take? JOHNSON: It took twelve days. And, uh, which was long even for those days, even for 1930. Of course, now I think the ships go across in two, three or four days or something like that, see. And then we came to New York. I don’t remember, Andrew, too much about Ellis Island. I remember going through, we went through fairly quickly. I remember we were not detained any particular length of time. And then after going through we went back to New York and stayed at a hotel overnight and then took a train to Chicago where my uncle, my aunt and uncle met me. The thing I remember about that trip was that we came over with all our winter clothes on and our heavy coats, and there was a heat wave at the time. It was like ninety degrees around here and in New York, and we had no thin clothing so we really perspired. And, of course, the trains weren’t air conditioned those days. So it was a hot trip. PHILLIPS: Let’s go back a little bit. You said your father fought in the First World War in Turkey. I remember you said that’s another story. Why don’t you tell us about it? JOHNSON: I’ll tell you a little bit about it if you have the time for a minuter. My dad, again, was a carpenter. His father, I have some more pictures in my albums, his father was a, uh, a bodymaker. When automobiles first came out in England they were a really work of art. All the body was wood, hand carved and handmade. And he make bodies for a number of, two or three of the big automobile companies. And my dad got into that business. But for some reason or other my dad, when World War started, wanted to get in the army. He volunteered, I think he was only sixteen or seventeen at the time, but for some reason or other they accepted him in the army. He was in the artillery, in the field artillery, and rode horseback in the cavalry. Got over, went through the Mediterranean, ended up in Baghdad fighting, and he fought against the Turks. When my dad, when he was in the YMCA in Aurora, he had a speech and a lot of photographs which I still have at home that he took with an old camera, of a lot of his army experiences, and used to give talks on that. And at that time he, one time he was in the, uh, he got into the signal corps and they were laying cable by horseback across the desert. And he got his horse shot out from under him and managed to get back to camp. He got dysentery. The people, he told me, the British soldiers were dying like flies with dysentery in those days. Of course, they had no antibiotics, no nothing. And they wrote back to his, uh, mother and father that he had passed away, but actually he didn’t. He survived. But he was delirious for many, many days and he told me he used to wake up and see all the bodies going by in front of him with all the people dying from dysentery. But somehow or other he pulled out of that and stayed in the army. Just because of the process of getting people out of the army it was almost 1920 before he got back to England. He was still, of course, a young man about twenty-three or twenty-four, twenty-two or twenty-three, all his hair had turned white due to the sun and being in the desert for so much time. And I think how, when I was in the army and when I got at the end of the war, I was luck to get out in one piece, I got a lot more benefits from the army than they did in those days in Britain. I think he got like ten or fifteen pounds and a medal, and two medals, and that was about it. And fortunately his father was still in business and he was able to get a job to get back to work. My dad never, my dad only got through what was the equivalent of high school. He was an avid reader. I always admired Dad because he could sit in a train or anywhere with all kinds of commotion around him, he could block it all out and study, which is something I never achieved. PHILLIPS: What sort of books did he like to read? JOHNSON: He like all kinds of books, political books, fiction, history books, he loved history. All of this helped him when he got a chance to go to Aurora University out our way. He took all the entrance tests and they gave him two full years of college credit. He started out as a junior on his third year of college because of the tests he passed. And I’m convinced this was only due to his own self education. PHILLIPS: Do you think that that was, was that implicit in his background or do you think it was exceptional in his case? JOHNSON: No, I think it was, you know, even all of my relatives, my aunts and uncles who we wrote to for many years, many of them never got through what would be the equivalent of our high school, because they had to go to work. But every one of them wrote extremely well. The penmanship, the sentence structure, the English. When I went to college over here, you know, many of the college students that I associated with could not write like my relatives did who hadn’t even had a high school education. And my dad took piano lessons only for two or three years. PHILLIPS: How old was he when he took the lessons? JOHNSON: Uh, he was probably about twelve, fifteen. Before he went in the army. But he had a German instructor. The instructor was extremely strict and he was one of these people if you played the wrong note yo got hit on the knuckles with the ruler, you know. And so he could read music well, he was a fine pianist and he had a real talent and he could play by ear. My cousin Connie over here, my uncle’s daughter, was a concert pianist, and an excellent pianist, but she could not play by ear. She had to have music. My dad, you could whistle any tune, you could hear a tune on the radio and he could go immediately down to the piano and make a beautiful arrangement out of it which really benefitted him at the YMCA because he worked with a lot of young adults and young people. PHILLIPS: I’d like to talk a little bit about that and I’d like to just get a little bit more on that sense of your family and relatives, their educational, their self educational skills and how they, if there’s anything more you can tell me about that. Let me try and ask you a question. Why do you think it was that they were so interested and were able, and was this common to other people within their generation? JOHNSON: I, I don’t know whether it was. I imagine it was, Andrew. My mother’s mother, my grandmother, my grandfather, by the way on my mother’s side, ran a big, what do you call the, uh, big blacksmith shop. He took care of all the horses in Liverpool. This is when they were pulling the street, pulling the trams, the streetcars, and pulling all the wagons and everything, before the automobile really got underway. He had the biggest blacksmith’s shop in Liverpool. My mother... PHILLIPS: What was his name? JOHNSON: His name was Johnson. My, no, their name was Elam. My mother’s married name was Johnson. Their name was Elam. And, uh, my grandmother had very little education. She came from a big family and had to go to work in the textile mills when she was very young. But she was determined to see that her children got as much education as possible. One of my uncles, my Uncle Charlie, went through college and graduated as a vet, a veterinarian, and was the first, one of the first veterinarians in England that operated on horses and put them out with gas. And I have pictures at home of whole horses on operating tables with sheets over them and him operating on them. And he was an extremely well know veterinarian, vet, in England. And, here again, a very talented individual. And my grandmother could not afford to send many of the children to college, so Uncle Charlie was the oldest and probably the smartest, so he got to go to college. And my mother never, most of the other children got through high school but they never got into college. PHILLIPS: This grandmother, Elam. You say she ran the blacksmith’s shop? JOHNSON: No her husband did. She ran the family and he ran the blacksmith’s shop. My mother always had a great love for horses. She was brought up with horses. Even in our home here, before she passed away, we had horses heads on bookends, horse pictures all over the walls. My mother was quite an athlete. She was, she got medals for swimming. She was the only woman field hockey player on Liverpool’s professional men’s hockey team, and also enjoyed riding horseback. So she encouraged me. My dad was totally non-athletic. PHILLIPS: I’m surprised that they would let a woman on the men’s hockey team. JOHNSON: Yeah, they did and, uh, I have pictures of her with the whole team. in a uniform with her hockey stick. PHILLIPS: The only woman? JOHNSON: The only woman on the team at that time. It was not, it was kind of a semi-professional. But she was really a very fine athlete, and I think that held her in stead when she came over here, because when had to do a lot of hard physical work which she had not been used to doing in England, when she came over here, and was a very determined individual. PHILLIPS: Can you give us a sense of what it perhaps was like for them because you were quite young but perhaps you can remember, to make that change. JOHNSON: I think it was extremely difficult, Andrew, it was extremely difficult. PHILLIPS: How would you describe it in terms of, was the British more genteel and this was more of the... JOHNSON: Well, I think it was just the, uh, it was just, uh, my mother was somewhat bitter at my uncle because she felt that he had not told them how bad the situation was, and really was trying to get them over to be with my aunt regarding the Depression and did not really help us as much as he could. In fact, she got kind of a negative approach to religion, and she had been brought up in a very religious family, and because she was the janitor in the basement doing all the work while my uncle was preaching in the church. And she came very close to dying once or twice. We had a little house that we were renting. My folks were never able to get enough money to buy a house until after I got out of the army and I had the G.I. Bill and was able to help get them their first house back in about 1946 or 7. But, uh, one incident I remember that she used to have to go, in the middle of winter, she used to have to go, we never had an automobile for many years, have to walk two or three miles to the church to stoke up the furnace and get the church warm. And she was very sick and finally it got so bad she couldn’t she had to stay home. The doctor came. Her fever was about one hundred and four. We thought we were going to lose her. He had, he took a blood test and had it tested back at the laboratory. He though she had diphtheria. The lab test proved negative and he didn’t believe it. So fortunately they did have a serum at that time for diphtheria. He gave it both to me and to her. My dad he wouldn’t let stay in the house. He had to go, it was quarantined. He had to go stay with my uncle. And fortunately the serum worked very quickly, but he told me if he left it another half a day she would have been gone. So they endured some very rough times. My dad got robbed twice, tied up to hot radiators and registers in the grocery store. He had a lot of trouble with his feet, flat feet, and he was a fairly slim man and small and so physically they had to do, they had to do a lot of hard work. And I think my mother really, really never, never became an American, never really settled in, you might say. I think my dad did more than my mother. But I was the one benefitted the most, I think. PHILLIPS: Do you think they would have gone home if they had the money to do that? JOHNSON: I think they probably would if it had been within the first ten years there or something like that. My mother had a bad heart condition, which plagued here continuously. But it was not a heart disease. She had tachycardia, which was really like a mechanical valve condition. The valve would flip sometimes and the heart would start beating at two hundred and forty a minute. And when she was a young girl she could stand on her head and it would go back and it would be all right. As she got older, it became a little more serious. And it would start beating fast. She didn’t know whether you could stop it in five minutes or it was going to take ten hours or two days. And we were always under this shadow of the heart going off like that. PHILLIPS: You say she used to stand on her head. Was that, was that the, uh... JOHNSON: It flipped the valve over. PHILLIPS: Was that recommended? Was that the way to deal with... JOHNSON: Well, in those days they didn’t even know what tachycardia was until she came over here. PHILLIPS: Did she discover that herself, or... JOHNSON: Yeah, yeah. She discovered that herself. It never did, uh, bother her that much until she began to get older. By that time they had quite a history of the situation, and she used to take some pretty strong shots to try and jar it back in place, which would make her sick and nauseated, and it was very difficult. Of course, if it went on for many, many hours it was a strain on the heart. Fortunately they had a, they got a medication out a number of years ago, and the name escapes me just at the moment, which she took for many years in her later life which controlled it, and she never had that condition for maybe the last fifteen or twenty years of her life. And she lived to be ninety-two. So she, the whole family, particularly on the, uh, on the ladies side of her family, they all lived to be anywhere form the middle eighties to the late nineties so they had a lot of longevity in the family. PHILLIPS: Okay, that’s the end of side number one. This interview is number [DP-5]. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO PHILLIPS: Continuing interview [DP-5], side two on the cassette, with Ken Johnson. There was one other thing. JOHNSON: One other thing, it goes back a little bit, Andrew, but you might be interested. I’ve got it in front of me here. We lived in Hillside, which was a little resort town near Southport and the Hillside Golf Club used to hold rider cup matches quite frequently with the American amateurs and the British amateurs. And my folks ran, you can see a picture of it here, this little Hillside Cafe. My aunt, my dad used to work in a tram in Manchester and he’d commute but my two, my mother and my aunt, ran this little cafe which was advertised, this is the regular golf handbook with the golf course and all that. So we had a lot of golfers come in from time to time, and also we were near one of the cricket and the rugby courses, so we had a lot of rugby guys coming in on crutches and whatnot. But, that’s probably about a 1928 issue or something like that. PHILLIPS: Back in Britain, now? JOHNSON: Back in Britain, yeah, before we came over. PHILLIPS: Tell me, we haven’t really talked very much about that actual experience going through Ellis Island. We talked about it briefly and you said you didn’t remember much about it. JOHNSON: That’s the problem, Andrew. I remember being there, I remember being there with a lot of people. I remember all our luggage. PHILLIPS: Do you remember seeing the Statue of Liberty when you arrived? JOHNSON: Yes. That I do remember. And, uh, it was a very emotional experience me for me going through the Statue Liberty last August. I never had had an opportunity to see it except from a distance coming in and from Ellis Island which of course is very close to the Statue. But going up in the Statue of Liberty brought back a lot of memories to me. It was a beautiful, clear night, the whole skyline of New York was there and we were up at the lower level, which you can reach be elevator, out on the first big deck there, and it was very quite, there was nobody around, the whole place was dark except our little group, and a boat went by underneath playing ‘God Bless America,’ and you could hear it very clearly. And it’s just, it was a very emotional experience for me. And it just kind of brought back to me all the years that had gone by since I first came in there with my folks and all the things that had gone by, and that really revived my whole interest in Ellis Island and what it had meant to me and particularly to my folks in coming through there. So I really don’t remember, I remember going there, I remember all our luggage, I remember a lot of waiting but actually, at least for us, it was done fairly quickly and we went through there in fairly good time and we stayed one night in New York and then we went in on at Chicago. PHILLIPS: When you arrived out here, what about school? I suppose you had... JOHNSON: That’s interesting. I had, I was five and a half, when I was in Hillside... PHILLIPS: Back in Britain? JOHNSON: Back in Britain, my folks sent me to a private school. PHILLIPS: Please explain what that is. JOHNSON: What it was, the schoolteacher was Miss Calder, and she taught out of her home. And in her backyard she had a big tent, which we used in the summer, and it was called Pentfield College and it was, it wasn’t a really snooty or snobbish place, because my folks didn’t have much money, but Miss Calder ran the school, and there must have been only ten or fifteen of us, and I still have at home a little black and yellow tie, a little cap I wore, and one or two of the students used to pick me up, I must have only been about three and a half or four at the time, long before you would start the school in this country. When I went over at five and a half I could do, I could multiply, I could divide, I knew all the mathematic tables, I knew an awful lot more than, and I skipped two grades when I came over here. And so I graduated from high school when I was just barely sixteen. And most children over here graduate when they’re eighteen. And I found it good and bad. It was, the experience, first of all, it was kind of a traumatic experience coming, to get in the schools, because I was kind of a shy boy and I found the schoolchildren here generally much more aggressive and it was, but nobody beat up on me. Fortunately I was in pretty good schools, great schools, over here but it was quite an experience for me to get used to the American schools. I did very well in school. I got on the high honor roll. I liked school very much. I did very well in school. I did quite well in high school. Nothing exceptional, I graduated from the Aurora High School out here. But it was difficult, even from the clothing. I was used to wearing little shorts, and most kids here wore slacks, you know. And I got ridiculed a little bit. You know, the British boy, and all that stuff, see. PHILLIPS: You had the long socks and the... JOHNSON: The long socks and the, yeah. My folks didn’t know either, you know. They had never been exposed to the schools. But my mother was very active in helping me, in the Parent Teachers Association, and the people in general treated us very well and helped us out. And I enjoyed my school experiences overall over here. PHILLIPS: Did you get teased because of your accent? JOHNSON: Yes, but you know, you see, what I have now, if you can tell, all I have now is a little bit of a Boston accent. Most people, in fact the last job I had before I came into government, I spent quite a lot of time in Boston and Newton and all around there. And I’m convinced, because by boss thought I could relate a little better. My boss thought I had a little bit of a Boston accent. But the accent, as you probably know, are quite different in England. For example, we were very close to Wales and we used to spend, when I was a little boy we spent vacations in Wales. And if you know the Welsh people, the real Welsh accent, it’s a totally foreign accent. There’s no way you can relate it to English, probably. Liverpool, the people in Liverpool have a particular type of accent. People in London have various accents, cockney and other types. And the same in Scotland and all over. So I found out that in the middle part of England, around Liverpool, Manchester and Southport and that, they probably have a little less strong British accent than the people over here think that the British have. It’s a little milder accent and certainly not like Margaret Thatcher’s accent, for example. And so it wasn’t that strong an accent that I had, really. It certainly was different, you know. PHILLIPS: The kids didn’t tease you about it? JOHNSON: Oh, yeah, they did to some extent, but I managed to survive pretty well. You know, I was an only child. Again, that always has advantages and disadvantages. Many times when I wished I had a brother or sister. I missed my two cousins in England, my two, my Aunt Ivy’s two daughters, Doreen and Nesta who I played with like sister when I was a boy, when we ran this cafe here they were right nearby and they were with me all the time. PHILLIPS: When you, then you went on to college? JOHNSON: Yes. I graduated from the Illinois Institute of Technology with bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering in Chicago here. And, uh, in between my college I was in the Army for about two and a half, three years. PHILLIPS: Can you relate a little bit of that experience for us? JOHNSON: Well, I was very fortunate. I was, I did about two and half years of college before I was drafted into the army, and by that time the war was pretty far along so that I did, I was just a private, I did all my basic training in Texas and at Fort Benning in Georgia and then I went over on a troop ship with our company into the Pacific, landed in the Philippines. This was in, uh, ‘44. I did some fighting in the Philippines, up north of the Lingayen Gulf, but by that time, fortunately the Japanese were on the run... PHILLIPS: Where was that, sorry? JOHNSON: In the Philippine Islands, north of Manila, in what they call the Lingayen Gulf, it was a gulf near the north part of the Philippines. And so I really was not, and we had to bring Japanese prisoners back to Manila on open troop trains, and the worst part of that was I would be standing guard in the corner with maybe one hundred Japanese prisoners on the train in the open, and we’d be coming down at night and all the Filipinos who hated the Japanese, would be shooting at them, and of course I was sitting right in there with them. And we lost a lot of Japanese prisoners who were shot at while we were trying to bring the prisoners back. But then after the war... PHILLIPS: Was there any attempt to stop that happening, or it was too... JOHNSON: Not much. There really wasn’t too much we could do about it. PHILLIPS: And not much sympathy, I suppose. JOHNSON: Not much sympathy at all, yeah. I, then we trained, we thought we were going to be invading Japan, and I was with the 25th Infantry. We did a lot of, we practiced a lot of beach landings, climbing down the nets off the boats and coming in with the, uh, with the attack boats, and a lot of beach landings and fortunately for me, I guess, even though I have mixed emotions, the atomic bomb was dropped in Japan just as we were setting sail for Japan. And MacArthur managed to get the peace treaty signed on the Missouri. We were the first troops in Japan after the war ended. PHILLIPS: What did, what did you think or how did you hear about the bomb being dropped? JOHNSON: Well, we were told about it when we were on troop ship. We were in radio communications with everything. PHILLIPS: How was it related? JOHNSON: Well, it was, it was relayed through the radio. In fact, our troop convoy was held in advance right off Okinawa Island until and if MacArthur could get a peace treaty signed with the Japanese. And when we were off Okinawa Island I think one of the worst typhoons hit Okinawa that they’d ever had. And I’d never been in a typhoon before, but our troop ship had all the engines going full speed ahead and it just stood still and we were all down below decks and it was as though a fleet of bombings planes were flying over for about six hours, you know. So we were fortunate. The only problem we had there was that after the storm was over there were mines floating all around and we had to try and clear the minefields. PHILLIPS: They’d broken off their moorings. JOHNSON: Yes. They’d broken off their moorings and were floating out free which blew up one or two of our ships. PHILLIPS: Just once again. Did you hear the message from Truman, because he had announced the bomb being dropped, or was it announced... JOHNSON: We didn’t hear the message from Truman directly. I happened to be pulling watch on board, on the desk that night and the short wave radio operator told us about it. PHILLIPS: What did he say? JOHNSON: He just said that they had dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima. PHILLIPS: Did you know what that meant? JOHNSON: We had, we had an idea what it meant, but we didn’t really, until long after that, realize or appreciate the thousands of people that had been killed and the total devastation that had been caused by that. And we had no feeling at all that that would, that a bomb like that could end a war. We still felt that we would be, we were supposed to invade at Wakayama, which was a city south of Nagoya on the main island of Honshu, and we still felt that that would all go through, that this was just another bomb. I don’t think we really appreciated that the two atomic bombs could end the war. Even though a lot of people forget that the Japanese had suffered tremendously long before the atomic bombs were dropped. For example, we landed at Nagoya, which had not been hit with an atomic bomb, but which had been a big city of several million people. As far as you could see, there was rubble, with maybe one or two building standing. The Americans, we had been bombing Japan for many, many months before the atomic bomb was dropped. But I think most of the troops in our command felt pretty strongly that if the atomic bomb had not ended the war, that many of us would not be here today, because the Japanese were dug in and were I think probably just as determined to fight for Japan as the British would have been if Hitler had invaded England, and it would have been a mass killing on both sides. So we had mixed emotions. We felt that, from our standpoint, it probably saved our lives. On the other hand there were thousands and thousands of innocent people killed, you know. PHILLIPS: Did you see evidence when you arrived in Japan very soon after the surrender, you said that you were the first unit. JOHNSON: I did get a chance to see Hiroshima not too many weeks after the bomb had been dropped. PHILLIPS: Why were you there? JOHNSON: Well, we were in Nagoya, which was not far away. And uh, we were helping, among other things, to get some of the people into hospitals that were left in Nagoya that came out of Hiroshima, so we got down, fairly close to where the bomb had been dropped. And, uh, during the time I spent in Nagoya, I did have an opportunity to see a lot of the poor people that had gone through that. And unless you’ve seen a lot of that, why, you don’t realize how terrible that is. And we had a little taste of that again with Chernobyl, but nothing like dropping something like that. In fact, if you were, if you have to be hit with an atomic bomb, you’re better if you’re finished right away. PHILLIPS: So you’re talking about the after effects of the bomb on the population. JOHNSON: The physical after effects. And many, many, many people, of course, died within the first year or two, just because of the radiation and the skin burns and all of this. Many people are living, but over the last twenty or thirty years have developed cancers of various types, and a lot of things which obviously are related to the radiation effects and all of that, you know. PHILLIPS: What was the feeling of the troops? Mixed emotions, no doubt, but can you give us just some sense of the scope of the feelings as you confronted these realities up close rather than distantly. JOHNSON: Well, I don’t really think it affected our feelings. All it did was realm bring us to the realization of, again, of the terrible aspects of war. Firsthand, as it now stands with a whole new development, and I’ve been watching on public television the last few weeks the, an extensive series on war and peace in the nuclear age and trying to deal with all of these problems and hoping against hope that the treaties that are in the development that were started with Russia will continue. But of course the big problems we have today is that there are many, many other countries besides just Russia and the United States that can trigger some holocaust like that. PHILLIPS: Did you see direct evidence when you went to Japan and of the fact that they were determined, that they were dug in there, or did they talk about how they were going to respond? JOHNSON: We saw bunkers and we saw a lot of evidence. The thing that amazed us, I think, probably, Andrew, was because we were given all types of training and indoctrination into what to expect from the Japanese people when we landed. The Japanese people had been through this war just like we had, and had been very vicious at times. But the people had been through something that we did not go through in the United States, and which they went through in England, you know, total bombing and destruction of all their homes and cities and thousands and thousands, millions of lives lost and all that. The amazing part, and we were told, we were not allowed to carry weapons when we walked through the streets in the towns, but were told to be in groups of five or six, and there were limits to where we could go and all this. We found out very quickly that by some, for some amazing reason, we never had any violence or any real show of resentment against us by the majority of the Japanese people that we dealt with. We cold never understand that. If they did have those kind of emotions, they never showed them. And I don’t think it was because they were frightened of us because we had, I think the American troops in Japan after World War Two behaved very well in general, and I think they did everything they could to try and have good rapport with the Japanese People. And this may have had some influence in it, but we were really quite surprised, at least in, and I was in Nagoya, I spent some time in Yokohama, and got around the, spent a week in Kyoto, I got around the country. I wasn’t there very long, about a year, but I saw masses of destruction and was really amazed that, that we got along as well with the people as we did. We tried to help them, we tried to, there was a lot of, the engineer, the engineering corps... PHILLIPS: You were in the engineering corps? JOHNSON: No, yeah, I was in the, I was in the 25th Infantry Division. But when I moved up to Yokohama I transferred into the Eighth Army and was in the engineering part of the Eighth Army. And had to do, because of my background at school, I then had to do a lot of design work on the drawing board for new areas, to help them rehabilitate, build new homes, and we did quite a bit of work to try and get things started again, with the government. A lot of that was due to MacArthur, to some extent. He did work very, I think a lot of the whole attitude was, uh... PHILLIPS: The Japanese were aware that MacArthur, in fact, had left the Emperor in place. JOHNSON: Yeah, right. PHILLIPS: Was that part of that, do you think? JOHNSON: I’m sure that was part of the whole thing. They never bombed Kyoto. Kyoto was not a big industrial city but it was the center of Buddhism and is all their religion, Shintoism and all that, and all the ancient temples. So that was left intact. And all the bombing of Tokyo, like you said, they left the Imperial Palace intact. PHILLIPS: Now, let me ask you this. Do you think the Japanese were aware that those things were purposely not destroyed, and appreciated that? JOHNSON: Oh, yeah. There’s no question about it. PHILLIPS: Did they tell you that, or do you think that? JOHNSON: No, I never had anybody tell me that. In fact I was, I was a little, I never did really learn the language that well. You know, we had, we had books, and I did the best I could, but I never did really learn the language that well. And the Japanese were not hostile, but they were not overly friendly. But, you know, we had, there seemed to be kind of a mutual respect. And I think what MacArthur did at least was well understood and things just went a lot better that I expected they would when I got over there, you know. I didn’t know what to expect, particularly after seeing the devastation, and seeing people the way they were after the bomb dropped. I don’t know whether, whether we would have been that docile over here under similar circumstances. I think it’s a little bit of their nature in a way, to some extent. PHILLIPS: Tell me about coming back to the United States, then, and being demobilized. JOHNSON: Well, I came back, had a long boat trip on a victory ships through the Aleutian Islands, Seattle, got demobilized in Chicago, came back home, was hoping, came back home in August, was hoping to start the September semester at school and finish my schooling. PHILLIPS: What year was this? JOHNSON: This was in ‘47, ‘46. PHILLIPS: A year after the bomb was dropped, now. JOHNSON: Well, yeah. Well, actually the bomb was dropped in... PHILLIPS: The war finished. JOHNSON: That’s right. It was about ‘46 or, yeah, late ‘46. I was told that there was no room in that semester at I.I.T. PHILLIPS: Sorry, what’s I.I.T.? JOHNSON: Illinois Institute of Technology, which was where I got my degree. Illinois Institute of Technology. It’s called I.I.T. But my mother persevered, she went to the school and told them that I was a veteran, I’d just got discharged, I had three years in at school, and that she had, we had had a letter from the Dean of Chemical Engineering and she had understood that they would make a place for me in the, and she convinced them to do that. So they got me in right away and that saved quite a bit of time. So I graduated. I only had one year to go, and I graduated the following September, in ‘47. And then I, my dad had a good friend at the YMCA who was the personnel manager for a manufacturing company in Aurora called Thor, T-H-O-R. PHILLIPS: Excuse me, can I ask you what you graduated in? JOHNSON: Mechanical engineering. PHILLIPS: Right. You said that. JOHNSON: I got a bachelor’s in mechanical engineering. And so I got a job working, designing portable electric and pneumatic power tools, drills and that kind of thing. PHILLIPS: So what did it feel like coming back to the States and going through that change after the war years? JOHNSON: Well, it wasn’t too bad. I think what helped me was that through my mother’s influence I was able to go right back to school. And I think if I’d have been sitting around at home for a few months that the, I was really too busy to really have a real problem with the transition. Then again I was fortunate that I was not wounded. I was not crippled, I was in pretty good health and I kept up, and still do, by the way, communications with a lot of the people that were in my company, that were with me in the Philippines. But actually, the transition, for me, was, another thing that was interesting to me was that I was, before I went in the army I don’t think I had ever left home, and I was an only child. When I went in the army and went through sixteen weeks of rigorous infantry training in Texas, went right away from home, never came back for two and a half, three years, I never got homesick, I never had a problem. And yet a lot of the other guys with me did have problems. And I don’t really know why that was. I felt I had, I felt bad about, you know, leaving home, and I’d been at home all my life, but I was always able to adjust pretty well to new, I never had a problem with discipline. Maybe that’s the way I was brought up. Never did mind taking orders. Never had a problem with doing things that I felt were justified and had to be done for the benefit of the whole operation, you know. PHILLIPS: Other people did have a problem with that, you said, is that the implication? JOHNSON: I think so,yeah. I think a lot of people do. A lot of my friends over the years, for example. For example, I would not be, I’m not the type of individual who could work on my own. I don’t think I’m disciplined that well. I have to be working as part of an organization, not worrying about where my salary’s coming from, with a lot of set goals and objectives, and knowing what I’m supposed to be doing. I like a lot of flexibility in the job, but I’m part of an organization. I’ve grown up, some of my close friends are just the opposite. They can’t stand, and maybe you’re like that Andrew, they can’t stand being confined into an organization. They want to be an engineering consultant on their own, their own boss, managing their own business and doing all that. And to me that takes a certain skill. I’ve found, over the years, that I don’t have that kind of skill and... PHILLIPS: Do you think that’s cultural, or is that personal? JOHNSON: No, I don’t think so. I think it’s personal. I think it’s probably personal. Although maybe in this country more people, obviously it was true in the old days when we had the individual entrepreneur, and now the small mom and pop grocery stores and all those kinds of businesses have faded into the big corporations and the conglomerates, which I think is very unfortunate, in some respects. PHILLIPS: And so, bring us up to the present. JOHNSON: Well, after I got out of school I worked for four and a half years for, I’m one of these guys, I haven’t had many jobs. I worked four and a half years for a power tool company, then, I got a chance to go to, at the Illinois Institute of Technology, where I graduated, they had a big research institute on campus in Chicago here, which was not really connected with the school. It was a not-for-profit research institute, like the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Stanford Research Institute and those kind of things. And I got a job there, commuted from Aurora bach and forth. I worked for them for over twenty years. Started out as a research assistant, ended up as Assistant Director of Research for the corporation. We had about two and a half thousand employees, with effort concentrated in mechanical design and engineering mechanics. I had some interesting jobs with them in a variety of areas. I managed three division. We developed a lot of special machinery for companies, I got into, even though I wasn’t real happy about it, I got a lot of patents in the design and development of automatic aircraft weapons. I worked very closely with the Air Force during the Korean War, went over to Korea, spent a lot of time at (?) Air Force Base in Florida developing weapons systems. I also did a lot of interesting projects like I managed to get a contract with Olivetti, who make typewriters and adding machines. And for a number of years we designed and automated all the packaging lines in Naples and Milan and Turin for Olivetti’s adding machine companies. Had a number of trips over there, we built machinery, worked with the Italians. They had a variety of adding machines, they were very automated, but all the packaging was all manual. And so we had the job and I had several of my engineers who went back and forth with me and stayed over there. I had some work in Sweden, in Vasteras. Then I got into robotics. I’m a certified industrial robot engineer, and still I’m involved in that. For a number of years I chaired and ran international robotics conferences. In Tokyo, in Zurich, Switzerland, in England where, in Nottingham, in Nottingham, and fully enjoyed the work. Where I worked at I.I.T. Research Institute, we were one of the pioneers in industrial robot development and worked very closely with the Japanese and a number of companies and ran these big international conferences on industrial robots. So I’ve dabbled around in a lot of different things. PHILLIPS: Okay. Well, I think that just about winds up interview number [DR-5]. I think that’s pretty well it, right? JOHNSON: I would think so, Andrew. PHILLIPS: I’m with Ken Johnson, it’s now, what is it, it’s about 12:00 and it’s, again the date is the 24th of March, and that’s the end of the interview.