MOORE: Good afternoon. This is Kate Moore for the National Park Service, and today is the 24th of January, 1994, and I'm in San Diego, California, at the home of Mary Holtz, speaking with Sam Karz, who came from Russia in December 1920 when he was, how many years old were you? KARZ: I was nine years old. MOORE: When you were nine years old. Why don't you begin by giving us your full name and date of birth, please? KARZ: My name is Sam Karz, and I was born in May the 11th, 1911. MOORE: 1911. And where were you born? KARZ: I was born in Minsk, Russia, White Russia. MOORE: What size town was Minsk at the time of your birth? KARZ: Uh, a nice town. It had a nice park. It had a river going through, you know, snaking through the whole city and bridges, it was very nice. And it was a very safe city. When I was five years old I used to go all over the town. I knew the town. Nobody would even talk to me, you know. Nobody would try to pick me up or try to do any harm to me in any way. Everybody minded their own business. They had that kind of a mentality. MOORE: And how large would you say that town was? How, do you remember how big it was? KARZ: Well, it was, it wasn't a small town, but it wasn't a big town, either, because it didn't have very big, high buildings, so it was a little spread out. But I knew the town, even when I was five years old. MOORE: What was the major industry in that town? Do you remember what it was known for? What was Minsk known for? KARZ: Minsk, it was mostly farming, business, manufacturing. We had all those things. But it didn't, it wasn't as industrial as Poland, like Warsaw. Because some of the merchants of Minsk used to go to Warsaw to buy materials, you know, for dresses, for suits. That's where they manufactured them. They had factories. So, I mean, in Minsk they didn't have ready-to-wear clothes. If you wanted to make a suit, you had to go to the tailor. If you wanted to make a dress, they had dressmakers, you know. They also had seamstresses that worked for ladies who were getting married, you know, the whole, their trousseau. So it was, and they had stores, nice stores. They had good, they had good food. They had nice fish. But then they were good cooks, because they had, there weren't very many restaurants. They had restaurants, but not many, and you had to go and buy it in the, there was a marketplace where they had, the fish were in big, uh, well, something like, you know, you have the, where in America the horses and the cows drink out of the, what do you call it? MOORE: Barrels? KARZ: No, no. Made out of steel. MOORE: Tubs. KARZ: Tubs, yes. They had them in tubs with ice. MOORE: Do you remember, how could you, what was your father's name, first of all, your father's name? KARZ: My father's name was, you want it in English or in Russian? MOORE: Both. KARZ: His name was Lebe Karzarnovsky. You see, it was, my uncle that came to the States, he found out that nobody knows how to spell Karzarnovsky, so he cut it short, Karz, K-A-R-Z, you see? MOORE: And what was your father's occupation? KARZ: He was a cantor and a, his line of business was yardage, his whole family, on my mother's side and on my father's side, they were both in that line. That's how they happened to get acquainted, you see. That's how they got married. MOORE: What did your father look like? KARZ: Well, he was a handsome man. MOORE: How so? KARZ: He had reddish hair, and a very, and blue eyes, and very fair. ( he shows photograph ) Here's my mother. MOORE: Yeah. And how tall was your father, about? KARZ: He was about seven, I'd say about seven feet. MOORE: Five foot seven, or six foot? KARZ: No, uh, no. He was about, around five foot seven or a little higher, taller. Maybe eight. He wasn't short. He was, I think, taller than any of us. My son is taller than me. ( he laughs ) He's about six feet. MOORE: And is there a story, what about his personality and temperament, your father? KARZ: He was a, his temperament was on the side that's nice. He liked to tell a joke, or he liked to listen to a joke, you know. He was an intelligent man. MOORE: And is there a story about your father that you associate with your childhood, any story you can tell about your father? KARZ: Uh, where are you looking? MARY HOLTZ: I'm just waiting for you. I'm not looking at you. KARZ: ( he laughs ) Uh, I have some stories. He used to like to go to the park sometimes. We had a nice park. During the wintertime the river went through there. She did the same, the river that I told you was snaked through the city. It used to freeze over. It went through the park, too, and everybody went skating. And some skaters went skating and they were pushing those chairs, some of them, you know. The young fellows were pushing the girls. So it was, it wasn't so old-fashioned, I'd like to think, you know. Like something you see in pictures sometimes. MOORE: What about, what was your mother's name? KARZ: My mother's name was Rebeka. They used to call her, well, in English, in Russian it's Rifka. MOORE: And what was her maiden name? KARZ: Her maiden name was Greenberg. MOORE: What was her occupation? KARZ: Well, she was a designer of children's wear, and she used to, she used to make children's clothes for the, for the governor of that territory. MOORE: And what did she look like, your mother? KARZ: You just saw her. She was a good-looking woman. That's what they say. MOORE: And what color hair and eyes did she have? KARZ: She had brown eyes and dark hair. Her family was on the dark eyes side, brown eyes. And my father's family, they're all blue eyes. MOORE: And what about her personality and temperament? KARZ: My mother's? She was a, she was a nice woman. She was a good cook. She really, her cooking was really just like, how do they call it in France, gourmet food, you know. She can, everything she made was, couldn't be any better. Because some of the restaurants here who make, who cook some of that stuff, it doesn't even resemble it, you know, and they call it the same name. MOORE: Could you describe your mother's personality and temperament? KARZ: Uh, she was kind of a quiet woman, you know. She liked to listen more than talk, you know. She liked to listen. She always had respect for her father, you know. In Russia, or in Mexico, they have respect for their, for their parents and for, the family are more, maybe they have more time to spend with each other. MOORE: Were there any stories about your mother that you associate with your childhood? KARZ: I tell you, when I was five years old, if I wanted to go to the park, I wanted to go by the river, one time I was walking on a log, and I slipped off and I could have drowned, you know. I could have drowned. ( he laughs ) And I didn't tell her that I'm going anywhere, I just wandered off. And I come back. She says, "Hey, where were you? I didn't see you around here." You know. Because she was sure I knew where I was, you know. It was friendly, you know. Like she had no reason to worry about anything. MOORE: Could you name your brothers and sisters in the order of their birth? KARZ: Well, there was one that, he got sick. You know, in Russia they didn't have good doctors and they didn't have good medicines. They were backward. And sometimes you couldn't get the food you needed because White Russia doesn't have good soil. Most of their food came from the Ukraine. They call it the Black Soil Country. Most of the good food came from the Ukraine, they were the bread basket of Russia. Now they have to get food, even from America now, you know. They stand in line to get a sandwich, an American sandwich, you know. ( he laughs ) What do you call that, drive-in here, where the kids like to go? MOORE: McDonald's? KARZ: McDonald's, well, they give it their own name, you know. ( he laughs ) MOORE: So your first brother died. KARZ: Yeah. He was a strong boy but he didn't get the right, you couldn't get the right medicines. Here he would have been helped, cured in five days. But there, actually they had, the whole town had one doctor that they called doctor. The others were kind of what they call, uh, they are half-doctors, you know? They started, you know, but they weren't, they weren't considered a real doctor. This doctor had a chauffeur, and he had a nice carriage, and he had a nice big home, and everybody knew that this was the doctor. MOORE: So your, you had one brother who died, and then who's the next in line in the family? KARZ: The next was, I believe my sister. MOORE: Her name was, is? KARZ: Is Mary. MOORE: Mary. So then you had a brother that died, then Mary. Then who else? KARZ: The next one was me. MOORE: You, and you're how many years difference between you? KARZ: Just, uh, maybe a year-and-a-half, something like that. MOORE: And then after you? KARZ: After me I had another sister. MOORE: And her name? KARZ: It was Rose. MOORE: Rose. And after her? KARZ: After her, uh, was it Maurice? MARY HOLTZ: No. ( voice off mike ) KARZ: After her there were, oh, there was another little girl, a blonde little girl, and this happened when the Bolsheviki came in and there was nothing to eat, you know. You had to go, my father went in the country and he got a half a sack of potatoes, that's all he could find, because the war was going on. And there was nothing to eat, and she needed to have rice because she had a, what do you call it? It's like the kids, now, that have nothing to eat. MOORE: Malnutrition? KARZ: No, she wasn't old enough to have that. MARY HOLTZ: Diarrhea. KARZ: She had the, what do you call it? Running stomach, when you don't eat. MOORE: Diarrhea? KARZ: The diarrhea. That's what she had. And she needed rice, she'd take rice, and you'd boil it with a little milk. And that will stop the running. MOORE: And so that child died. KARZ: Yes, she died. I was sitting on the floor. I was pretty young then, too, playing with her. And she was, she looked okay. She was a beautiful young girl. And two days later she was dead. I couldn't believe it. MOORE: So was there another child born after that little, that child had died. KARZ: Yes. MOORE: Who was after? KARZ: She was the last one. She, no, Maurice. Maurice was the last one, that's right. MOORE: Your brother Maurice. KARZ: Maurice, yeah. MOORE: Okay. Now, do you remember your house in Russia, in Minsk? KARZ: Yes. MOORE: Could you describe it to us. ( an airplane can be heard in the background ) KARZ: Uh, which one? The first one or the last one? Because we moved around quite a bit, you know. First, first my father opened a store on one street, so you, we rented a place in a courtyard, like, where there were quite a few apartments, there was an apartment, and there was a couple of single homes in the back, and there was a place where the owner owned it, and I remember his name. They used to call him "the Glazer." When I was young, he must have been a glazier. He had a big beard, a black beard. But he didn't do anything any more. But he owned the property income. But that's what they call him, "the Glazer." MOORE: And that was the first house you remember. Then you moved after that? KARZ: That house we moved to, no, there were, the first one was a house that was in the back, where my father had his store, there was a factory in the back. This man made matzos for (Yiddish), you know. And he had, he had two or three beautiful girls. ( he laughs ) And this, one of the girls, they were kind of, the mother was, didn't have the mother. She was, she died. So there was, they were a little, you know, they took care of her own business. You got to have (?), daughters have to have a mother. And there was one of the girls, a beautiful girl, that she, she had a boyfriend who was a, he was a general, somebody in the army. A captain, a general, he was big. She was dressed beautiful with a suit. And the first time I saw her my father was, I was going to the store with me, and she happened to come home, you know, to see her father for a while, because she didn't live in the house, at home. And she was dressed in a beautiful suit, and she was beautiful. I was just, maybe six or seven, seven years old, but I saw, I understood that was something I had never seen before. ( Ms. Moore laughs ) MOORE: Okay. Well, back to your house a little bit. ( she laughs ) That's a good detail about what you remember. But how was your house heated that you lived in. Do you remember? KARZ: Oh . . . MOORE: The one that you talk about going away from when you were a child, which house are we talking about now? Which house do you prefer to talk about? The last one before you left? KARZ: Well, before we left was, was a big, it was about four acres. It was owned by my uncle, the one that came to Mexico. They told him to get out of there because they're going to, the Bolsheviki were going to take away his house, because they told him, everybody that owned their homes, they told them to paint them up and put them in first class shape. And they used to send inspectors to inspect how they did it, you know, if they did the right thing. So after everything was finished, everybody did all the work on their homes, made them look good. And at that time they also put in electricity. They didn't have electricity. See, you had lamps (?). So the electricity, the wires were outside, they weren't inside the wall, you know. ( he laughs ) They make, their first job, go, make holes in the walls. ( he laughs ) So . . . MOORE: So they had to make the houses to certain standards. KARZ: Well, there were some of them that are beautiful homes, some that were made good. So what was I, about the . . . MOORE: About the wiring of houses? KARZ: The four, there are four acres. As you came in you had about an acre on one side and an acre on the other side. They had one of those, where you can sit inside, what do you call that? MOORE: A gazebo? KARZ: Yeah. ( he laughs ) Right inside, they had a nice, how you say it? MOORE: Gazebo. KARZ: Gazebo, yeah. And wherever, sometimes on one side they used to sometimes plant things, you know. Because one day I was fooling around there with a stick. I saw something growing out, so I start digging, and it was horseradish. So I told my uncle, I says, "You know, you got horseradish growing." He says, "Oh, yeah?" At that time I was about nine years old, you know. So he says, "Where?" So I showed him where, so he goes and digs it all up. He was glad to get it. ( he laughs ) MOORE: You had a garden. KARZ: In the back there was a garden, a fruit garden, all kind of fruit and pears. And they had a sweet kind of an apple they don't have here, about this big, ( he gestures ) green. It's just as sour as vinegar. Can't eat it. And they had also kinds of berries growing on bushes. So, and we lived in a house, it was actually a duplex. At one time it was some building next to a big house that was like a duplex, that was, they had some kind of a, it belonged to the city, you know. Some kind of bureau or something. But when the Bolsheviki came in it was, they had nothing there, so they rented it out. So there was another family living in front and we lived in the back. It was a big house and, you know, tall, uh, tall ceilings. MOORE: How far was this? Was this house in or out of town? KARZ: It was, no, it was in town. And my uncle lived there, too. They also had a barn on the side. At one time he had a cow there. He had, he always had everything to eat because he came from a town that was near the Polish border, so he needed food, he used to go out there at night and he used to take in stuff, anything he wanted, you know. So he always had everything to eat, but he was, he was a stingy miser. ( he laughs ) He wouldn't loan us anything or give us anything, you know. MOORE: Do you remember the furniture in your house? How did you furnish your house? KARZ: Huh? MOORE: How was the furniture in your house? What was it like? KARZ: It was a heavy kind of furniture, yeah. MOORE: And did, how about the kitchen? Could you describe the kitchen to us? KARZ: The kitchen, they had those, they didn't have the kind of stoves like they have here, steel stoves. Their stoves were like baker's stoves. First they make it hot with logs, you know, wood. And then they close it up, and they put everything in there. They take out all the hot coals outside, and they put the pots of food inside to cook. Sometimes you do it overnight, cook slow. And they close up there, so the heat doesn't go out the, uh, the hole there. MOORE: And who did the cooking, well, who did chores around the house? Who did the cleaning and the . . . KARZ: Oh, yes. You could also sleep on top of the, what do you call it? It wasn't a stove, oven, yeah. You could sleep on top of the oven. It's warm. ( he laughs ) MOORE: Who could sleep on top of the oven? You? KARZ: Anybody. Yeah, I slept on it. ( he laughs ) MOORE: Well, who helped around the house? Who did the chores around the house? KARZ: The chores? Usually when you have young kids, that that was during the, before the Bolsheviki came in power, you had a country girl whose parents were, you know, they had farms, but they were poor farmers, you know. That should have been, all the farmers, the poor ones, they belong to some nobleman, and then the nobleman, he owned the forests, big forests, they own big pieces of land. They inherited it, or the king gave it to them. MOORE: And, so you had servants that were farm girls? KARZ: Well, when the kids were small my mother had a farm girl. But I remember ( he laughs ) one day when my mother was out, she went out to see her boyfriend, so left me alone in the house . . . MOORE: The servant girl went to see her boyfriend. KARZ: Yeah. You know, they were, they weren't (?). ( he laughs ) So I walked out of the house, and I was looking out through the window. It was, the window was about this high, you know. ( he laughs ) So I went over too far, and I went off, I fell. I fell over. I didn't get hurt. So I went back to the house, and I was waiting. The door was closed, locked, so I was waiting there, and I found out that upstairs was a school where they taught kids who couldn't talk, you know, they were dumb, deaf. MOORE: Deaf. KARZ: Deaf? MOORE: Dumb, dumb. KARZ: Deaf and dumb, because they were talking with their hands, you know. And I was looking at it, and I didn't know they were there. I just happened to be there when they were going out of school, you know. So after a while my mother came back, about a half hour later, and she says, "Where's the farm girl?" "I don't know. I didn't see her go out." ( he laughs ) I didn't know. So that was it. That's the place that we, we lived in that was like an apartment house. It was a four-plex, I believe. MOORE: Now which, now, when you fell out the window and the farm girl left, which house were you in? KARZ: That was the glazer's house, the glazer's yard. MOORE: Was that your last house before you left for the United States? KARZ: No. MOORE: The glazer's house . . . KARZ: The last house was my uncle's. MOORE: Right, okay. So that was when your at the glazer's house. Okay. I've got to make sure it's right. All right. Um, who did the cooking in your family, then? You mentioned your mother's cooking, but did anyone else cook for you? KARZ: Uh, no. My mother did the cooking. Maybe the, maybe the girl helped. MOORE: Okay. And what about your grandparents? Do you remember your grandparents? KARZ: Why, sure. MOORE: And where did they live? KARZ: They lived in a different neighborhood. MOORE: Uh-huh. Was it nearby? KARZ: It was across the street of a, what do you call it, where sisters live. MOORE: Uh, a convent. KARZ: A convent, yeah. END OF SIDE ONE, TAPE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE MOORE: And which grandparents are they? Your mother's parents or your father's parents? KARZ: That's my mother's parents. MOORE: Where . . . KARZ: My father's parents came from the Ukraine, you see. A town in the Ukraine. Molleed [ph], Mollgidoff [ph]. MOORE: How do you spell that? KARZ: Who knows. ( he laughs ) MOORE: So did you know your father's parents? KARZ: And then some of them lived in different places. Many of the Jewish people lived in that town where that atomic reactor went off. There were a lot of Jewish people, kids got hurt there, you know. They were sent to the States. MOORE: Did you ever know your father's parents? KARZ: Yes, I knew his parents. I didn't know his first wife because she passed away when, he had two families. MOORE: Your father's father. KARZ: Yes. MOORE: I see. KARZ: He had two families, because he married again and he raised another family. So all together he had probably eight or something like that, you know. MOORE: Kids? KARZ: Yeah. MOORE: Children? Now, what about your . . . KARZ: Some of them are on my father's side, see. My father's from the first wife, then they were, then he started another one. MOORE: Do you remember your father's parents', your grandparents' names on your father's side? KARZ: I know my father's father was, he had a, he was in the yardage business. He had a store in Molligidoff [ph]. MOORE: Now, what was his name, his first name? KARZ: His name? I don't remember his first name, but his second, his last name was Karzanovsky. MOORE: Right. Now, what about your grandmother, his first wife? What was her name? Do you remember? KARZ: No, I never saw her. MOORE: Okay. And . . . KARZ: But his, I saw his, my grandfather's father. He's, my great-grandfather. MOORE: You saw him. KARZ: He was close to a hundred years old. So what, he didn't die from old age. He died from, during the Revolution, there was nothing to eat so he starved to death. MOORE: He was one hundred? KARZ: Yes. So, uh, my, my father's side are, there's two sides, you see, to the family. One of them, one of my uncles, I saw, I know my great-grandfather. I saw, he came to visit us. And he was never in business, not a businessman. He worked for the czar, for the czar's railroad. He was a buyer for the railroad. MOORE: Your great-grandfather? KARZ: Yes. MOORE: Worked for the czar. KARZ: Yes. He was not a business man type. He was more of a, an official type, you know, because he worked for the railroad, he was a buyer. MOORE: Your mother's parents, did you know them? Did you . . . KARZ: Them I know because they lived in the same town. MOORE: Uh-huh. And how would you, what was your mother's mother's name? KARZ: My mother's mother's name? MARY HOLTZ: Greenberg. Greenberg. MOORE: No . . . KARZ: Her name was, uh, I knew her name, but . . . MOORE: How often did you see your grandparents, your mother's parents? MARY HOLTZ: Chana? KARZ: Quite often. MARY HOLTZ: Chana Greenberg . . . MOORE: And how was quite often, like once a week? KARZ: I would say so. MOORE: Okay. And were you, who were you closest to in your family? Who were you particularly close to, your closest family member, would you say? Who would that be? KARZ: You mean at that time? MOORE: Yeah. KARZ: At that time it was, I would say it was, uh, I would say it was my, uh, my grandfather. My grandmother was, she was a quiet woman, a very nice woman, you know. MOORE: So you were close to your grandfather, your mother's father. KARZ: I would say it wasn't, it was that way back, it's not that I was close to him, you know, but he would be the closest, because I don't care, I didn't care too much for my uncle, you know. MOORE: What was religious life like at home? KARZ: I went to Hebrew school since I was maybe four years old. MOORE: And did you attend, did you go to temple? KARZ: Well, in Europe they don't have no, you know, have temples. They call it, the big, the big synagogue they always call the korshul. You know, kor is singing, kor. They pronounce it "hor." But the big synagogue, they had big ones there. They were just like temples here, you know, bigger. And they had the finest cantors. The cantors were real musicians. They could sing in the opera. So they used to call, in every city they'd call them the korshul. Shul means synagogue. MOORE: Oh, synagogue, yeah. Okay. So did you attend korshul on the high holidays? KARZ: Yeah. Yeah, I used to, my father used to take me there. MOORE: How would you describe your parents? Which of them would you say, if you would say, was the most religious, your mother or your father? KARZ: I would say that they were both religious. I mean, they never doubted anything, you know. ( he laughs ) They just took it as, the way it comes, they were brought up that way, and that's the way they were. MOORE: What language did you speak at home? KARZ: I spoke Russian and Yiddish, you know. MOORE: And did you, when you went to Hebrew school, so . . . KARZ: Yes, I spoke Hebrew, too. MOORE: Okay. And what holiday celebrations did you celebrate at home? KARZ: Oh, they had, I used to like the holidays where they have the, it has to do with the, with the farming, you know, with the, they make those booths, and they hang up a lot of fruit, different. You know, that's something that is straight from the Bible, you know. It's, the holiday of fruit, you know, when they take the fruit down from the fields and from the trees, harvesting. It's harvesting. MOORE: Succoth. KARZ: It's the harvest, uh, what do you call it, harvest, the Christians have it too but they call it something else. MOORE: Oktoberfest, well, no, but . . . KARZ: The same thing. It comes from the Bible. It's when they harvest the fruit and everything from the fields. MOORE: And that's what you liked best. KARZ: I liked it. MOORE: What was your favorite food that your mother cooked well? What was your favorite food, then, as a child? Do you remember anything? KARZ: Well, yes, I remember that. My favorite food was, very few people, restaurants, only in Jewish restaurants that know how to make it right, you know. It was, they call it cabbage rolls, you know. They take the cabbage and they boil it a little so it will be flexible so you can bend it, and then they take like a hamburger, you know, about that big, ( he gestures ) ground meat, and they put it inside, and they put some honey and other things and they roll it up, see, and then they put it into the oven, slow cook it. That was my favorite. It was a little like sour and sweet, you know, with honey in there, too. MOORE: And, uh . . . KARZ: I still like it. ( he laughs ) But once I bought one here. The only thing that was in there, it was just boiled, uh, cabbage. ( he laughs ) I wondered who made this. MOORE: So your favorite celebration was the harvesting celebration. KARZ: Yes. MOORE: What happened then? KARZ: After that? MOORE: What happened during one of those celebrations that you liked so much? Why did you like it? KARZ: Well, let's say when you're a kid, you know, you like the celebration where you eat good. ( he laughs ) MOORE: They had good food. KARZ: They had good food, yeah. MOORE: What kind of food did you have? KARZ: Different holidays had different foods, you know. Baking, we had baked stuff. MOORE: What kind of stuff did you have during the harvest? KARZ: During the harvest you had fruit, a lot of fruit, you know. That's, that was the main thing. And then they had some baked stuff in different shapes, you know. A triangle with different stuff inside. They had, actually the Jewish people have very good cooking, you know. It's not monotonous, you know, there's different things you can make every day. You don't have to, you don't have to eat beans every day or rice. ( he laughs ) MOORE: Now, how about school life? You went to Hebrew school. KARZ: Yes. MOORE: And did you learn any English before you came to the United States? KARZ: No. MOORE: What was school like when you went, when you were . . . KARZ: Well, you know, when you're young, I learned the language very fast. Even when I came here, we stayed a couple of days before we went to Rochester, my uncle did, we stayed in New York. My mother had a cousin there. So we stayed there a couple of days. And I went outside, I seen two boys fighting, boxing. I never saw kids box, because in Russia the kids seemed to get along, you know. We used to, during the winter we used to go sliding down a hill, you know, and the kids used to make their own sleds. I made my own sled. MOORE: Where? In Russia? KARZ: In Russia. I used to use the strips of steel that the big heavy packages come in for the runners, you know, and nail them down. They had one hill that was big, two hills that were pretty steep. We used to go down, sledding down. You know what's the funny part? I remember a man in Palm Springs with his wife. He moved into a, it was in a couch, you know, a coach. And I started talking to him. He was kind of, he wasn't too big, he was, when he was a kid he was smaller than his age. I started talking to him, and we found out we come from the same town. So I says, "Did you ever go sliding with a sled down the hill there on that street?" He says, "That's right. That was me." MOORE: So you met a man in Palm Springs that you went sledding with in Minsk? KARZ: Yes, when I was a child. MOORE: That's incredible. KARZ: His wife, his wife was Polish. MOORE: That's incredible. ( she laughs ) All right . . . KARZ: A very nice woman. MOORE: Did you go to school in, you said you went to Hebrew school. Were you taught at home, or did you go to a school in Russia when you were a child? KARZ: I tell you, there was too much fighting going around. Sometimes the Germans come down and throw bombs. Sometimes the Polish Army went through and they met the Russian Army, so they start shooting at each other, and they were, they went right by our house, the building. At that time I was, we were at my grandfather's house. MOORE: Who went by? ( she coughs ) Excuse me. KARZ: The Russians came in one side, the Polish came in one side, and the Russians came in the other side and they met, you see? They happened to be in a big field. They used to call it the Turkish field. This Turk used to farm the big piece of land near the river, you know. Then the shooting started. I was watching them from the top of the window, you know, because they were actually shooting this way ( he gestures ), but there were buildings there, and I didn't look out too much. But you saw fires, it was getting dark. I saw fires flying around, you know, from the shooting. MOORE: How old were you then? KARZ: I was about eight years old, maybe eight, eight-and-a-half. So the next day, a day or two later, I had to go and find out what's up there, you know, in the battlefield. So I went up there, and there was a couple of Russians, they were watching that nobody should take some of the guns, you know, that were around there. They picked up one of those. But I saw guns laying around, you know, rifles, things like that. They told me, "Don't go up there." MOORE: Who won that battle? KARZ: Nobody, they just both, the Polish, they were going back to Poland. And the Russians were, they were in Russia. MOORE: You mentioned bombs. Do you remember any bombing? KARZ: Well, at that time that place was so small they can't, they couldn't throw big bombs. They threw a bomb on the depot, the train depot. That's what I remember. One of my aunts lived not too far from there. She was a, she was a, she had a, what do you call it, she was a doctor of, uh, a, uh, what do you call it, she was a . . . MOORE: Midwife? MARY HOLTZ: Midwife. KARZ: She was a midwife that went to college, to medical school. She wasn't just a, uh, she, all the doctors there in Minsk were her friends. MOORE: Uh-huh. Okay. Do you remember, what did you play as games for entertainment as a child? You mentioned sledding, and you mentioned, what did you do for fun when you were a child in Minsk? KARZ: Well, I liked to walk around and see different places, you know. MOORE: So you were exploring. KARZ: I liked to explore. That's what I liked. I liked to walk up to the market where they had all kinds of stuff there. Like they had a, a store that was all glass, and they were, they had all kinds of cheeses there. They had cheese that came from Holland. You know Holland cheese? MOORE: Here in America, or back in Minsk? KARZ: Minsk. MOORE: In Minsk, sorry. KARZ: When I was a kid, I liked to walk around. And they had salamis hanging and stuff like that, so I used to liked to go by there once in a while. And the butcher shops, yeah, the butcher shops were right next to the, to the river, you know. At that time they didn't have no refrigerators or freezers, so they, every day they had to have new meat, new meat. And also they had to be kosher because the people there, in Minsk, were about sixty percent were religious, they ate only kosher. MOORE: Did you keep kosher at home, your family? KARZ: Oh, yeah. At the home, yeah. MOORE: Do you remember any stories about why or do you remember your parents telling you why you came to the United States? KARZ: Why? Because my father lost all his money. The Bolshevikis took away everybody's money. There was no private property, money especially. Then the people had their homes, they lived in them themselves. Like my uncle, he had like a complex on a big piece of land. They let him have it, too, but they figured when they had nothing else to do they'll go after him. They weren't in a hurry about it, you know. So if it wasn't for us writing to him he should sell the house, the home he was still able to sell it. MOORE: When? KARZ: Sell the home . . . MOORE: When you were back here? KARZ: Yeah. That was years later. MOORE: Yeah, years later. So he came back here. Your family wrote to that uncle who owned that place and said sell it? KARZ: Yeah. But not right away. MOORE: Yeah. KARZ: Maybe ten or, ten or twelve years, maybe fifteen years. So they, so they took everything away. My father didn't have anything. Some, my, uh, who, some of them that later became uncles and married my aunts, you know. They, one of them was a fur expert, you know. And so he had money. So they took all his money away, and they, they thought he had more, so they figured they're going to punish him, so they put him down an outhouse inside overnight. MOORE: Put who? Put who down in an outhouse? Who put whom down the outhouse? KARZ: The Bolsheviki. You know Bolsheviki. MOORE: Yeah, I know. ( she laughs ) KARZ: They didn't, if a person, everything belonged to them. You see, they say everything, there's no private property, no money. Nobody, everybody has to work for that. MOORE: So they put somebody in your family down an outhouse? KARZ: Yes, to get all his money. They thought that he didn't, he didn't give all of it. ( he coughs ) But the funny part of the Bolsheviki is after they're all through with all that, you know, they give the man back the job because he's an expert. So he's working for them, you see. He got a good job, and they give him a better, they even give him a better apartment. MOORE: This is which uncle? KARZ: They figure what belongs to them belongs to them. ( he laughs ) To him, that he's an expert, and you got to give him credit for his knowledge. MOORE: And who was this, this man? Was he a relative, you said, right? KARZ: He was a relative. He was an uncle. He was married to my aunt. MOORE: I see. And your aunt was, who was . . . KARZ: What happened was this aunt was, I believe she was a, what do you call that, she worked in a store that sold materials, and she was a, uh, a, uh, well, she was more than a bookkeeper, she was a, uh, what do you call it, a, uh . . . MOORE: Accountant? KARZ: Accountant, yes. And so my oldest aunt, my youngest one went to the, to the medical school to learn to be a midwife. MOORE: Now, okay. So you said that you had a relative in the United States already that sent money, I believe you mentioned. KARZ: Well, he's the one that sent us the permit and the money and everything. MOORE: Do you remember getting ready to go to the United States? KARZ: Why, sure. We had to stay there for, there was about six or eight months because we couldn't get out. Nobody was allowed to, to get out of town, what they call it. They call it, there's a certain name for it, that nobody can go out, can go anywhere. You see? MOORE: So you were waiting. KARZ: We snuck out. MOORE: Yeah. And how did you do that? KARZ: We got a man who had a horse and wagon, you know, a small wagon. And so we got him, he wanted to get out too, so he got, my father got him, he paid him, and he asked him if he wanted to take us out to, to Poland. Now, Poland was only maybe, I don't think it was more than fifty, seventy-five miles, was the border, and on the other side there was plenty to eat, you know. The Polish side had plenty. MOORE: How long was the trip, then, by wagon? KARZ: It was, I believe it was three days, you know. It was always just walking. In some places they had no roads like we have here. The roads there, some places, like the beach. There's so much sand, you know. So everybody has to get out and help the horse push the wagon, too. MOORE: And do you remember what you took with you? What did you pack with you? KARZ: We went through all these battlefields, and some places, there's one place that's known for mud, mud fields, you could sink in. So during the war the army, I don't know what army it was, I think it was, it was the German Army, they made, like they put like trees, what do you call them, logs. First they put the bottom so they could go through there. They couldn't go through there. They had to go a long ways to get to there. So they make this like a long road. So they went over that mud flats. It was more than flats. You could sink in there. ( he laughs ) So they, we went through there. We went over it, so there's one, one was, one log was missing, so the wagon went, came off. So the man got scared, he said he could have broken a wheel. So then we went into this town that was, well, I skipped a lot. It was, you could just make a story out of that. He let us off, off by the border, see. So the only way we could get to, to, uh, Poland, to the big city in Poland, uh, what do you call it? MARY HOLTZ: Warsaw. MOORE: Warsaw. KARZ: Hmm? MOORE: Warsaw. KARZ: Warsaw, yes, was to take a train. They didn't have passenger trains. They only had trains where the Polish soldiers were going home. The war was ending. But that they, the Polish soldiers are not, they're not Jew-lovers. They were the, just brought up that way. Although they didn't, they didn't go in for bodily harm to Jews but they, you know, they liked to show off that they're better, you know. But there were Jewish people in Poland that were well known, you know. Not all the Poles were that way. They had their aristocrats. They had, well, the greatest piano virtuoso, he later became that president of Poland. So they didn't, weren't interested in helping us. See, the freight trains are very high there in Russia. Somebody has to help you out. Also, we had bedding and stuff like that. So nobody wanted to help us, you know. They weren't interested. They were tired out, and they, they treated us all right, but they didn't do anything for us. So I see it, too, two men standing on the side, maybe seventy-five feet away from the Polish soldiers, I said, "I wonder who, why they not wear those uniforms?" So my father and I went, went up to them. We says, "I wonder if you can help us. When a train comes in, if you can help us get everything up." So he says, "Well," he says, "we're not wearing no uniform because we are Jewish and we don't, we're glad to get out of there." So I guess they didn't have no picnic in the army either. So they went and helped us. MOORE: So they . . . KARZ: And here the soldiers are all inside sleeping, and we're there, and they see we got bedding, so they took our cushions and everything, and they fell asleep like this ( he demonstrates ) because we were so tired. ( he laughs ) It didn't bother us. Until we came to Warsaw. That's how we came to Warsaw. MOORE: Back up a little bit. What was in your wagon? What did you take with you? What did your family take with you? KARZ: Oh, something to eat, you know. The last day that we were out with this here horseman, he stole our food at night while we were sleeping. So the next day, the next day we were almost in Poland, so we didn't go without food for very long, and he disappeared. ( he laughs ) MOORE: So the guy with the horse disappeared. KARZ: Yeah. MOORE: And he had taken some of your food for the family? KARZ: Yeah. ( he laughs ) END OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE ONE, TAPE TWO MOORE: So did you take anything precious with you from home? What did you take from your house at all? Anything? KARZ: From the house? Well, we took mostly bedding and I believe we had a candelabra. See, every Jewish house has a candelabra, a silver candelabra. But what happened to that candelabra I can't tell you. In, what do you call it, near the, in New York, near the Statue of Liberty they had this place called . . . MARY HOLTZ: Ellis Island. MOORE: Ellis Island. KARZ: Ellis Island. And I see, I hear people say such nice things about it, and I know there is something different, you know. Because I, that's, those that had money to go on the first and second class ship to buy a second class, first class, they were treated like they were, uh, like they're supposed to be treated, you know, like passengers. But those that had the third class, they were in the hold there, and they were just like, uh, they were just like, uh, where they keep horses, you know? Just . . . MOORE: A barn? KARZ: They had a . . . MOORE: Or a stall. KARZ: No. They had . . . MOORE: Stalls? KARZ: Like, uh, partitions, you know. But the women were in different sides of the places, and the men were in different. That was the difference. But they were all in the same hold, you know. MOORE: Are you talking about at Ellis Island? KARZ: No, wait a minute. MOORE: Or in the boat? In the boat? KARZ: That was in the boat. MOORE: Yeah, okay. KARZ: In Ellis Island, all those that had tickets for first and second class, they got right off the boat with their relatives and their cousins, and they all came to take them off. But those that were in third class, most of them were working people, you know. For somebody that came out like we, they came out with no money, so we didn't have much money. We could have, we could have, if we knew it was so bad, we would have bought a second class, you know. But after we were there a couple days, my father went upstairs and said he wanted to pay more money and go upstairs. He said they're all out of them. But I believe that the reason he said it was because we had so many kids, and they didn't want us upstairs. ( he laughs ) MOORE: That's interesting. Okay. So, let's go back to, now, we got from the horse and buggy, you got to the border, you got on the train, and then the train was going to . . . KARZ: To Warsaw. MOORE: To Warsaw. And what happened when you got to Warsaw? KARZ: It was going slow. It wasn't, you know, speed like here. They were, up there they had, they were just four wheels in those, uh, those, what do you call them? MOORE: Cars. KARZ: Cars, yeah. So everybody was just snoring and sleeping on our, on our bedding, but we were glad to have them sleeping. We got off in Poland. Poland was like the United States. They had restaurants, and they had gas and stoves. This kind of stuff, like we have here. But, you see, America, at that time, they were, they were building a lot of factories, and they were building, they needed miners to dig coal, and they had a lot of them in Poland and different states there. They didn't have enough work. So they, a lot of working people, and the working people that came through Ellis Island, and they tell us to sleep on the floor. Everybody's sleeping on the floor, as you know. MOORE: Okay. Let's go back for a second. In Warsaw, what happened in Warsaw once you got there? Tell me, tell us about . . . KARZ: When we got to Warsaw we rented an apartment, and we went out in a restaurant to eat regular. ( he laughs ) MOORE: So you had it good. KARZ: And we also had to wait for some money from my uncle. So we waited there for I don't remember how long, maybe three or four weeks. And then we took a ship, the New Amsterdam and Rotterdam. They were ships owned by Allen. MOORE: And where did they leave from? KARZ: I believe it was Rotterdam. No, wait a minute. No, I think it was, it was on a port in Poland. I think Gdansk, I think they, they call it. I think it was Gdansk. MOORE: Okay. So which, what was the name of your boat? KARZ: It was the Rotterdam. MOORE: You went on the Rotterdam. Do you remember seeing the boat for the first time? KARZ: Yes. MOORE: What was your impression? KARZ: It was a, you know, like a kid, something big. I'm going to go over the ocean. MOORE: And what about the boat itself, the accommodations? You described some of them. Where were you? KARZ: Oh, yeah. I believe the first and second class was all right. MOORE: But the third class was where you were. KARZ: Yes, because, see, the first and second class had some regular people that were Americans that were traveling, you know. And they weren't all greenhorns, you know. ( he laughs ) MOORE: And what happened on the boat? Tell us about, was it, what was it, how was it for you on the boat? KARZ: Well, I wouldn't say for a young kid it wasn't that hell, but I remember the one day, they used to feed us big chunks of the beef, boiled beef, and the kids got tired of it, you know, all going across the ocean, you know. They didn't give us no variety, you know, just there were always those big chunks of beef on the table. So, of course, in Russia they didn't have a, they would give anything to have a meat like that, but you can get tired fast. The kids, you know, are like that. So one day they gave us chocolate. Everybody there got chocolate, because, you know, in Rotterdam they make a lot of chocolate and a lot of cheese, you know, big, round cheeses. They used to send them to, they sent them to America, out to, they used to export them to Russia, all over. They used to call it the, Hollandam Kase. It's a kind of German type of, it's Yiddish, too. The German and Yiddish is, actually the Yiddish is like the old German. And the new German is, they made it a little more different. MOORE: Well, they gave you chocolate, and what was your reaction? KARZ: So I ate so much chocolate, I liked chocolate. The next day I had such a terrible headache from eating all that chocolate. ( he laughs ) MOORE: Was there anything on the boat that you'd never seen before? KARZ: No, they had a big storm. MOORE: There was a storm. KARZ: And the windows, you know, the round portholes. See, we were below the water line. So it started, the water started spraying inside, making everything wet, so we were, we went down to the (?) of the (?) there to close the portholes. I think it was going like that. ( he gestures ) MOORE: Up and down, up and down. KARZ: Yeah. And you know that they said, the captain said that's pretty close to going down, because in those days they didn't have those things that kept the ship going straight. It's a big wheel inside that spun around, and that kept the ship going even, you know. So they go sideways or something. MOORE: Was anybody, were you sick at all? KARZ: Ah, I don't, I believe that some people got sick when the thing started going, you know, when it really started going up and down. MOORE: Did anybody in your family get sick? KARZ: Ah, I don't remember anybody getting sick. MOORE: Okay. Now, did you go on deck very much? KARZ: Oh, yeah. ( he laughs ) Once the captain, he was on, you know, was up there watching, so I went to the front, you know, and the wind was blowing me back. So he saw where I was going. It could have knocked me off on the side, you know. So he told me, "Get away from there! Get back!" And he put a rope across, nobody should go up. MOORE: So, you were being an explorer then, too, weren't you? KARZ: Yeah. Because sometimes the wind is pretty strong, you know. MOORE: What about the food? Was the food, you mentioned the beef. Anything, was it okay food otherwise? KARZ: There was plenty to eat, you know. But we didn't get the same food that they got in first or second class. MOORE: Well, do you remember seeing land for the first time? Land? KARZ: Land? MOORE: Do you remember anything? KARZ: Yeah, well, everybody was trying to see the Statue of Liberty. MOORE: And was, what kind of scene was that? KARZ: You can see the city, the big buildings and everything. When you're way out, maybe you're a hundred miles out, you can see it from a distance. MOORE: How was the Statue of Liberty? What do you remember about that? KARZ: Well, it was a big statue, and . . . MOORE: What was the atmosphere? KARZ: I'd never heard of it before. ( he laughs ) MOORE: And what was the atmosphere on the boat when you saw the Statue of Liberty? Do you remember? KARZ: Well, I thought it was nice having a statue like that on the bay. ( they laugh ) MOORE: And tell us about, then, Ellis Island. What happened? The boat, how did you get from the boat to Ellis Island? KARZ: Oh, yes. I'll tell you something that I didn't like. They stopped it later, the government stopped. All these, the people, the working people, the ones that were in third class, they took them off the boat. MOORE: How? KARZ: From the boat we were on, on Ellis Island. MOORE: Did the boat come into Ellis Island, or did you have to take another boat from the boat to get to Ellis Island? Do you remember? KARZ: No. We had to, no. I don't think they had any place to tie up (?) on Ellis Island. MOORE: So you must have come with another little boat. KARZ: Yes. But this is something that's interesting. They used to take, they took, they used to take these third class people that were on third class on the boat, on the ship, that it was actually a steam, a steam bath, you know. They had rooms, and the women were in a different neighborhood, uh, and the men were in a different section, and they used to lock you up. And it was on the water. This was a ship. The ship would drown, everybody would go down with. And they locked you up, and it got so hot inside that everybody started knocking on the door, you know. So later on, I read about it, too, that one of the people that came over wrote about it. He was already a, this way he was in government, and he became a, he was a, uh, governor or somebody, and he came over from the old country when he was a kid. And he said that that was a dangerous thing to do. He remembered that. So they made a law they can't do it any more. MOORE: And did that happen to you? KARZ: It sure did. We were scared, because it got so hot inside. That was a steam bath. MOORE: So they made you take . . . KARZ: And then, while we were taking that steam bath, they took our clothes and they steamed them, they put them in hot steam to kill all the, whatever was there. Because some of those people, the working people that were in there, they had a few, uh, lice or something like that, you know. They had to kill everything that's in the clothes. MOORE: So they actually disinfected your clothes? KARZ: Yes. MOORE: And they made you take steam baths. KARZ: Yes. MOORE: The whole family. KARZ: Yes. MOORE: Everybody who was in that class of yours. KARZ: Yeah. Everybody who was in third class. MOORE: They had to. Okay. KARZ: Because, I believe that the first and second class, they must have had showers there. MOORE: I see. Now, what do you remember about Ellis Island other than that steam bath? Do you remember coming off the boat and entering a building? KARZ: Yeah. Which building are you talking about? MOORE: Well, you tell me what happened. You walk me through it. KARZ: After that we, they let us go off the ship. MOORE: After what? After . . . KARZ: After the steam bath and all of that. MOORE: Right. So the steam bath was the first thing. KARZ: So we went down, first they wanted to get rid of everybody's, you know, ( he laughs ) uh, whatever they were, their dirt and their, uh, the lice. ( he laughs ) Because someone must have had it. So, we didn't have it. MOORE: For the record. KARZ: Huh? MOORE: For the record, you didn't. Okay. So you came out of the steam bath, and then where did you go? KARZ: We, they let us off. My uncle came, my mother's uncle came and took us. We went to his house. MOORE: Now, so did you have to stand in line or anything? Did you have a medical examination? Did you see a doctor? KARZ: No. They took your name. They took your name, that's all. Somebody I know that the name was, a European name, it was long. The man that took down your name, that was the name that you were going to be called in the United States. He couldn't spell it. So he says, "From now on, your name is Malloy." You know, Malloy is an Irish name, and this guy was Jewish. ( he laughs ) MOORE: Well, what about, we have records that you were detained at Ellis Island. One of your family members was sick. Do you remember anything about that? KARZ: About what? MOORE: Was one of you, were you detained, kept over at Ellis Island for any length of time? KARZ: Yes, they kept us over there. MOORE: Where? KARZ: In Ellis Island. MOORE: But where? KARZ: We slept on, first we were sleeping on the floor. MOORE: And why did they keep you? KARZ: I didn't see anything nice about Ellis Island. MARY HOLTZ: About Maurice. You have to tell them. I'm sorry. KARZ: No, no, no, Mary. That's, I never, I don't remember what it was that you're talking about. MOORE: Okay. That's all right. So you said, let's go back to, you don't remember being, you had to stay at Ellis Island, and you don't remember why. KARZ: No, they didn't tell me why. MOORE: Okay. So then you said that, how long was that that you stayed there? KARZ: I would say, uh, ( he pauses ) It must have been about four or five days, something like that. MOORE: And what did you do in the meantime? If you're a kid, and you slept on the floor, what did you do during the day during that time? Do you remember? Did you get to play, or . . . KARZ: No, everybody, they were from different countries. And some of them were, were, uh, known for their, being crooks, you know. I don't want to say who they were, but they were known here, too, for that, but you never hear about them now. But at night when you're sleeping, they used to rob you. MOORE: The experience at Ellis Island, would you, how would you describe it? KARZ: I would describe it as it was a miserable place, as far as I was concerned. MOORE: Do you remember if it was clean or not? KARZ: I don't see why they talk and write about it like it was something great. What was great about it? It was a big building, and the people, it had no regular beds to sleep in. At first they, we slept on the floor, and everybody was separate. At night some of them would, while you were sleeping they would come to rob you. MOORE: And what about, was it clean? KARZ: Well, I didn't see no dirt there, you know, because they had, they had, they, it wasn't dirty because the dirt wasn't important. ( he laughs ) They had people that needed jobs, you know, for cleaning. MOORE: Okay, so . . . KARZ: Actually, a lot of the people they let into the United States because they needed them. They needed them in the mines and the factories, all over, see. MOORE: What about, did they, were they polite to you, the officials? Do you remember going through, and people, did they treat you nicely? KARZ: If it was polite to them, they were polite to you. MOORE: Did, how did you, did you understand any English at that time? KARZ: Eh, no. I never, uh . . . MOORE: Okay. So you said your uncle came and took you. Where did you go from Ellis Island, once you were released? Where did you go? KARZ: From Ellis Island we went to New York for a couple, we stayed there till, how long did we stay there, maybe three or four weeks, something like that. MOORE: Where in New York? New York City, or . . . KARZ: Well, I'll tell you, I remember my uncle, my mother's uncle, my cousin, he just moved to a new neighborhood which is called, it's an old neighborhood now, it was new then. It was something, they had homes something like here, cottages. It was in, uh, ( he pauses ) It's, uh, it's closer now to, it's some place around Brooklyn, you know. It was just like new, new streets. MOORE: And you went there first. KARZ: So we went there first. MOORE: For how long? KARZ: I don't think we were there more than, uh, a couple of weeks, I think, not more than that. MOORE: And then where'd you go from there? Where did you go from there? KARZ: From there we went to Rochester, New York. MOORE: To Rochester, New York. Okay. And where did you stay in Rochester? With whom? KARZ: We, uh, we stayed just a couple of days at my uncle's house until we found a place. MOORE: In Rochester. KARZ: Yeah. A nice, big apartment. So it was all neighborhood. MOORE: And the apartment that you lived in, how was it heated? How big was it, and how was it heated? KARZ: That apartment was, they had, they used to, they had the furnaces. They used to, in Rochester they used to use the hard coal. They had to buy the coal, you kept it in the cellar. We used to bring it up in a bucket. When you're downstairs, you didn't have to bring it up, because the furnace was there. ( he laughs ) MOORE: But how big was it? You said a big apartment. How many rooms were in that apartment? KARZ: How many, it was two or three. MOORE: And what job did your parents have when they first came to the United States? How did they make a living in Rochester? KARZ: In Rochester? Uh, in Rochester my father was a cantor. He had a very good voice, you see. And he came from a family that were religious, so he knew how to preside at different holidays, you know. Because the, he used to get contracts for holidays to sing, you know. And he used to get a man, he was a, who always had a five or six singers, and he was the leader. So my father didn't have to practice with them except, you know, just go through it. And he used to, he used to get contracts and get paid. In those days, it was a lot of money. But later on it was, the Depression came and it was, synagogues didn't have no money for cantors. It wasn't as good, you know. Now they have a union in Los Angeles, and if they don't treat the cantors, you know, the way they should, or they, you know, when you hear somebody singing, you'll always find, and there's a big crowd, you'll always find people that will say, "He should have done it this way," you know, or, "He should have sang the other way." It's the same thing, you know, in anything business that has to do with singing, you know. I can understand, I appreciate every kind of singing, just because I heard a certain type of singing when I was a kid doesn't mean anything. I appreciate Western, any kind. If it's good, it's good. If it's bad, it's bad. MOORE: What about, back to your house there in Rochester, what did your mother do for a living? KARZ: Now, that's a different story. ( he laughs ) My mother, she knew how to design children's wear. So she opened up a little place in the house, and she used to make little sailor suits, and my father went out and sold it to the stores. There was a lot of European people living there like Italians and, and they liked those kinds, especially little suits, you know. So she used to give out some of the work to tailors, who used to work in shops. You see, Rochester is known for, Rochester is clothing, suits. The biggest companies are in Rochester. So there's always somebody who needed a little more money. So they used to put, finish off some stuff, or make buttonholes, or do something, you know. So she doesn't, didn't do the whole, all the work. She used to also make some dresses for fat women. They weren't dresses. They were tents. ( they laugh ) MOORE: I see. So basically she was a designer for those years, and helped the family. KARZ: Yes. ( he laughs ) MOORE: In that apartment that you first rented, what was the plumbing there? KARZ: Well, there was, the old-fashioned plumbing was strong plumbing. It was good. MOORE: Indoor? KARZ: No, here. In Europe they used the same kind, those that had plumbing in the house, but the others had outhouses, even in the city. MOORE: Did you have, back in Russia did you have indoor plumbing? KARZ: We had a regular bathroom. MOORE: In, in Russia. KARZ: Yeah. MOORE: And then when you came to this, here, to this Rochester, did you have indoor plumbing? KARZ: Why, sure. Rochester is, it's America. It's not a farm. ( he laughs ) Rochester is known for, uh, it's known for Bausch & Lomb, the biggest maker of lenses, and, what do you call it, cameras, you know, cameras. They make Kodak cameras. That's the biggest camera factory in the world, I believe. Many of the Rochester people used to live there, work there. MOORE: What about school when you first got there? You were a young boy. How was school when you went to school? KARZ: Well, I thought that, well, see, in America not every city and every school is the same. Some schools are good, and the teachers are good. Some of them are, they discourage you instead of encouraging you, you see? And I was unlucky enough to be not encouraged. I used to, I used to paint in oils, and I was, so I gave the teacher it, to show it to her. I showed it to the teacher, to this art teacher. She says she wants to show it to her friends. So she took, I had a picture of Abraham Lincoln, and I had a picture of, a snow picture. I gave her a few pictures. But I, when I asked her two months later, she said she didn't know what happened to them. She gave it to somebody, and they never gave it back to her. She just took it for herself. So that was very discouraging for me, you know. MOORE: Well, what about learning English? How did you learn English? KARZ: Very easy. Through reading and, actually it's a very easy language. Russian is hard. MOORE: Well, do you remember in school, when you first went to school, did anyone tease you for being from Russia? KARZ: Huh? MOORE: Did anyone tease you for being foreign when you were in school? KARZ: In school? MOORE: Did you use jokes . . . KARZ: Well, actually in that neighborhood, where that school was, it was an old neighborhood, and they had a lot of, quite a few foreigners, you know. But most of them, the teacher, the athletic teacher was Jewish, and athletic for a woman, she, a nice-looking woman, a young woman, she used to like to ride horses. So one day she rode through the forest or something and a branch caught her eye. She had trouble with her eye, but they fixed it up, you couldn't tell anything. So what happened, I remember, she was very, she was single. A teacher . . . END OF SIDE ONE, TAPE TWO BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO, TAPE TWO KARZ: It wasn't, she didn't come to school for a while, because it was, you know, you don't fool around with eyes. MOORE: Well, you used the word when you first, jokingly, earlier in the interview, "greenhorn." Did anybody call you that when you were a child? KARZ: No. It's usually the greenhorns that called other greenhorns "greenhorns" ( he laughs ) that just came in. But, uh, there was two, I got to tell you this, you know. I got to tell you the good and the bad. There was a fellow, an Italian boy, a young fellow, he must have been about nineteen years old, and he wanted to move to the States, to Rochester. Rochester had a lot of Italian people. He must have had some relatives there. So, you know, the Italians are very artistic, and he was a, he always wore a nice suit. But this time he made a new suit to order, and in the back he made it, like, you know, like they make, uh, like, something like western, just a collar here, ( he gestures ) in and out, you know, just around here, and it was a real fancy suit. And he went to the school to learn English with the young kids. So the, what happened, in the morning, waiting for school to open, and the principal, Mr. West his name was, comes driving by with his Model T, and he sees that kid, that young fellow with that suit. He stops the car, and he says, "What kind of suit are you wearing?" He says, "You can't go to this school wearing suits like this." So he didn't, he was polite, the Italian fellow. He didn't say anything. After he, after the principal, Mr. West, after he left he told him, he says, "You can't go to this school." He says, "Is that what I came here? Is this the, is this the free country," he says. He says, "I'm going to go back to Italy, if this is the way they treat me. I can't wear a suit, the kind I want. Then I don't want to stay here." Now, this is one fellow who went back. Then there was another one, he came from Holland, and he was about, he was a big fellow, but he was a young fellow, probably maybe sixteen or seventeen years old. But he was going to this school, you know, the, with the kids, you know, grade school, because he wanted to learn English. So one day an American kid, some other kid, also big, but this one was, I think, born in America. He picked on him. And this fellow, he was a pretty good fighter, the one that came from, uh . . . MOORE: Holland. Holland, the guy from . . . KARZ: From Holland, yeah, they started fighting, and the fight started about nothing, you know. But, anyway, they, he wasn't, he showed he can fight, but even if you're a good fighter, you know, one of them get hurt, you know. So after he got through, he says, he says, he looks at me, he says, "The people here are very mean. They're not friendly, you know, especially the young people. They're not friendly. He started a fight with me for no reason." He says, "You don't find that in Holland." He says, "I think I made a mistake coming here." He says, "I'm going back to Holland." They were pretty tough here, especially in New York and LA and certain places. But certain places they were, like the South was all right. They were gentlemen, you know. MOORE: Did you ever experience any religious persecution here at all? KARZ: Uh, not, mostly ( he clears his throat ) I can go any place and they think I'm a German or a Russian. I don't care where, they're talking about Jews, and I just stay there and listen. They don't know who I am. So, what did I want to say? MOORE: What I need to ask you about it, uh, what about your life after school? What happened when you, tell us a little bit briefly about what your life was in this country. So you went . . . KARZ: Well, see, I didn't have, ( he clears his throat ) I'm a little hoarse. I took some, something for the . . . MOORE: Throat? KARZ: I was a little hoarse, yeah. It made me sleepy, too. MOORE: You went to, from Rochester, where did your family move to, then? KARZ: To California. ( he laughs ) MOORE: And how old were you then? KARZ: I was around thirteen-and-a-half years old. MOORE: Thirteen-and-a-half. And you went to which, to which town in California? KARZ: Los Angeles. That's where everybody went. ( he coughs ) MOORE: Okay. And what did your parents do there, in Los Angeles? KARZ: My father got a, he was a cantor in a, the biggest orthodox synagogue for six years, so he was well-paid. MOORE: And so what did your mother do at that time, then? KARZ: At that time my mother did, didn't do anything, no. MOORE: Was she designing clothes? KARZ: Somebody, a friend of hers came in and asked her if she'd do it for her. MOORE: Um, all right. So after Los Angeles, what about your life? Did you go on, what did you do for a profession? What was your profession in life? KARZ: Well, I did different things. I had a factory, I worked for other people. Actually, at that time, there weren't many jobs in Los Angeles, you know. It's not like it is now. ( he clears his throat ) Can I have a little water? ( he laughs ) ( a telephone rings ) MOORE: Answer . . . ( a telephone rings ) OFF MIKE: Hello? KARZ: But we lived in many towns, you know. I traveled with my father to many cities. He gave concerts. He got contracts. So I was all over Canada. I drove. My father didn't drive. I was just, I got my license when I was fifteen years old. I always liked cars. I used to, I can work on cars. Oh, yeah. (?) MOORE: Did you later in life marry and have children, or did you, did you marry ever? KARZ: Oh, yes. I got married in Mexico City, where I have an uncle and aunt. So I married a girl that was born in Mexico, a blonde girl, a nice-looking girl. MOORE: And how did you meet your spouse? Oh, sorry. How did you meet your wife? KARZ: How did I meet my wife? I was introduced by my uncle or somebody. MOORE: And was she, and what nationality was your wife? KARZ: She, uh, she was a, she was born in Mexico City, but her parents were born in, uh, in, uh, Galicia. You know Galicia? It's between, in, it's between, uh, my mind's already getting a little, uh, not that sharp as when we started. ( he laughs ) So, uh, she was, they came from Galicia, it's Poland. It's on that border. One side is, what side is, it's a country where, who was that doctor there that's know, doctor, uh, who has to do with . . . ( he pauses ) MOORE: We can come back to that. That doesn't really matter. The question I have only is that you met in Mexico City, right? KARZ: Yes. Well, this is, one side is where they speak, they speak German there, but it's not Germany. MOORE: Austria. KARZ: Well, a lot of those, uh, that wrote music lived there. And the other side was, something I can tell already, you can tell. One side, no, you don't want to tell. MOORE: That isn't really as important as, you met your wife . . . KARZ: This is important. MOORE: Oh. KARZ: It's part of Poland. It's called Galicia, see. You know Galicia? MOORE: Uh-huh. KARZ: So you know one side is, they speak, they speak German there. The other side is, uh, there's a blank there. MOORE: We can add it later. Um . . . KARZ: So, uh, what was the last question? MOORE: The question is, okay, you met your wife, and how old were you then, when you met your wife in Mexico City and married? KARZ: In Mexico City, it's the parents who pick out who the man should marry. You see, it's just like it used to be in Russia or in Poland, see? And they have to, usually he's a young fellow, and maybe he's still going to school. A lot of them are dentists, they go for those doctors, they go for that. So, yeah. Well, my in-laws were, they were poor people. They were, the father had a little liquor store. He came from Poland, too. He came from Galicia. So, uh . . . MOORE: So did you have children, or did you continue living in Mexico City then? KARZ: No. I just stayed a couple of months. My father was sick. I had to come back. Anyway, I wasn't looking to get married. So, uh ( he gestures ) . . . MOORE: Just because that's the microphone. KARZ: Oh, I see. I wanted to show you my son. I have two sons. One lives in, uh, in, on the way to San Francisco. No, no, to, uh, one lives here, and the other ones lives in, uh, I think it's on another coast there. Let me see, where is it? MOORE: So you had two sons. What were their names? KARZ: Huh? MOORE: What were your sons' names? KARZ: One name is Leon, and one is Steven. MOORE: All right. And, um . . . KARZ: One is, ( he shows photograph ) I want to show my son. MOORE: Good looking. KARZ: Oh, yeah. MOORE: And then who, that's a picture of whom? KARZ: That's my son, my younger son. He's a teacher. MOORE: And your older son is? KARZ: He's a businessman. MOORE: When you look back on your life, when you look back on your life, how do you view your parents' immigration? Do you think that coming to this country, how do you think, what do you think about them coming to this country, your parents? KARZ: Well, I'll tell you, there were times in Russia where you didn't have enough to eat. You had to stay four in line to get something. It wasn't very long ago this new president, prime minister, has changed the whole thing. Even now they have to, they have, they have hundreds, they have a very big American company, what do you call them? My mind is already getting tired. MOORE: Yeah. This is a long time we're talking. That's all right. But the thing is . . . KARZ: So the, uh, they have a, this company has made hundreds of, they stay four in line to get the sandwiches. MOORE: Oh, yeah. McDonald's, you mean. KARZ: What do you call them? MOORE: McDonald's. KARZ: McDonald's, yeah. MOORE: Yeah. KARZ: And they're building more. But they don't call them McDonald's there. They gave them their own name. MOORE: But what about you? How do you think, do you think your parents' decision was a sound one to come here, that it was a good decision to come to the States? KARZ: If we didn't come here, we probably would have been buried a long time ago. Of course, sometimes it's just the opposite, some are not. Nobodies became somebodies, because they got free college education, and they even got money. They got a room, because they needed it. They were smart enough to know that you got to, you have to have smart men, scientists, in order to get anywhere. MOORE: You mean, when the United States brought in people who were intellectuals into the country? Is that what you mean? KARZ: No! They had plenty of intellectuals there. The Russians are not dumb. ( he laughs ) They're smart people. MOORE: Well, we'd like to thank you . . . KARZ: Even those people that come here now, they wouldn't let them out before, you know. They come here, some of the Jewish people. They're all educated. They're all, they were in trouble there. There was hard times, too. They had to stand in line to get food. Otherwise they saw that you, that you had to get a good education, because without an education you couldn't do anything, you couldn't fight a war, you wouldn't have no engineers, and that's what they have a lot of. They have a lot of good engineers. MOORE: Well, we'd like to thank you on behalf of Ellis Island for helping us and for giving your side of the story and your family's story, this will be you three, and we'll send you a copy of this as well, for the whole family, the three of you, then. KARZ: Okay. MOORE: This is Kate Moore signing off in San Diego, California on January 24, 1994, for the Ellis Island Oral History Project. KARZ: Oh!