DALLETT: My name is Nancy Dallett, and I'm speaking with Lotte Kent on Wednesday, November 27, 1985. We are beginning this interview at 3:40 PM and we are about to interview Mrs. Kent about her immigration experience from France in 1941. This is the beginning of side one of Interview Number 88. Uh, let's go back to the beginning of your story and could you tell me where and when you were born. KENT: I was born in Prague, Czechoslovakia. DALLETT; And when was that? KENT: 1914. DALLETT: Tell me about, uh, your childhood. KENT: I, we left Czechoslovakia when I was six. Uh, my father was in business in Germany, Frankfurt, Germany. So my whole school life was in Frankfurt, Germany. And in 1933, even though we were Czechs, my father didn't want to stay under the Germans, under Hitler who, in '33, came to power. And so we left, I left with my parents, back to Prague. But I went then for three months to Austria and a few months to Paris, uh, where I met my husband, my future husband. And, to make a log story short, I got married in December '34 and we moved first to Austria for a few months and then to France. And in France I stayed from 1935 till '41. 1941, uh, during the war, had started in the meantime, uh, we, my mother, yeah, my husband was in the concentration camp as Austrian. The French had a very odd law. You, we declared ourselves, I don't want to be confusing, we declared ourselves ex-Austrian when Hitler moved into Vienna, because he was Austrian. And to prove that we were anti-Hitler. And, nevertheless, they, when the war broke out, all the even ex-Austrians were put into concentration camps. You became, overnight, because Hitler marched into Austria, an enemy alien, even though you had declared yourself anti-Hitler. He was born in Vienna, and he was in the concentration camp for quite some time. They didn't put me into a concentration camp because I was born in Prague. So he was in a concentration camp from '39, and there they had no choice, either to go to another work camp. or to sign up for the Foreign Legion for the duration. Normally Foreign Legion you have to sign up for five years, but during the war they, you could sign up for just the duration and they wanted to replace the real Legion there and put them in the front, and put the mostly Jewish refugees into Africa to replace them. So he signed up for the Foreign Legion, and when France, uh, declared, uh, the end of the war, I don't know, wasn't Armistice, I don't know what they declared, a kind of armistice with the Germans, he was dismissed and came back to Marseilles from africa. I, in the meantime, lived in France, was not allowed to work before, as an alien. When he was in the Foreign Legion I got a work permit and I was working for a few months. And then the Germans started to, uh, take over past the Ligne Maginot, and all that. It became quite dangerous for us to stay. And we intended to leave. But I stayed with my parents. Uh, they were Czechs. We couldn't leave in time because my mother had an operation and was dismissed the day the Germans marched into Paris. And, uh, we were panicked because you didn't know what they would do to Jews. And Paris was completely empty, there were, just the, the Concierge was there, the Super, and the pets. But the streets were empty. People were running like crazy. They, you know, they panicked, everybody panicked, with good reason. Even the French panicked. And we were in the front of our house. There came a big truck, a beer truck, completely open truck. And he said, "Who wants to get out?" He was supposed to take people out of Paris. And it was a disarray, you have no idea. So we got on the truck. Now, my mother was just operated on, so she could sit in the, I don't know how you call it, next to the driver, uh, that has a name, cabin, I don't know. And we tried to leave Paris. Only, we made about five miles an hour because there were all these people walking out of Paris. The, the highway was completely clogged with walking people with, with all their possessions on their back and we made about ten miles that evening. and we stayed overnight on the truck. And like this we were on the way for about two weeks. Now, we saw French troops, but they weren't in our direction. They all said, "We have had enough. We are looking for our wives." You know, I mean, nobody was fighting. I mean, I wasn't sending them back, but they didn't. So the Germans overtook us, and we were, uh, in the, uh, West Coast of France. We made that far. And, uh, we were always housing in some school or on some hay or whatever. And the Germans came in and looked at all of us. I mean, I spoke a perfect French. I didn't, you know, I was, I mean, they took me for French. But the Germans didn't know that I, of course, didn't speak German. So we were with the others, because whoever was on that truck was French. There were twenty-seven, all of us, on that truck, and they were extremely nice people. This was a very lower middle-class, all those who couldn't afford to go out, they were the last, uh, and most helpful, and to my mother, marvelous. If there was a mattress she got it and things like that. All the villages were completely abandoned. You couldn't get anything to eat because the villages were abandoned. You couldn't even get gas because there was nobody to attend, so we just took it. And then there was a farm we took what was there because the farmers had left and we saw a lot of dead cows and things unattended to. And a real panic, disorganized, awful. And we, there were a few incidents on the trip. I don't know whether you're interested in that, yeah? We were in, uh, an abandoned camp, kind of. And all of a sudden mass hysteria. The people, not ours, there were other people too. Not only from our truck. There were other people there. "This is a spy, he is a spy." And they shot him. I have no idea whether this man was a spy or not. Maybe he had an accent. I was with my parents, and I told them, "Don't you open your mouth." You know. You know, that was the situation at that time. And then there was a little girl, she maybe was twelve, with her whole bundle, her whole, everything she owned it was in a handkerchief. She was an orphan and she had been taken care of by some friends in some restaurant or something. And they left her. So there was a woman and two kids in our truck. The two of us, we said, "If we have to leave, you come with us." They took over, I must say, I could have afforded it better it wouldn't have entered my mind. Some people were just marvelous. so, anyway, the Germans were faster than we were, so there was no use fleeing. Where to? So we went back to Paris, because there we had our apartment. And in the beginning our concierge and whoever said, "Oh, they are perfectly correct, the Germans." You know, they thought they would rape in the streets and they didn't, in the beginning. But then the Germans, they're taking the food, the coal. You couldn't find anything and more in the stores. You saw German soldiers with big packages and all. I mean, they took anything there was. And, uh, in our apartment there was only one room heated, because there was also lack of coal, I mean. And then finally the people said, "Oh, they are not correct." You know, finally the Underground and all this formed. But I was very upset that in restaurants, all of a sudden, everything was two, two languages. All of a sudden it was German and French. I mean, my recollection of the French at that time was very bad. I know I asked somebody when, before we returned to Paris, uh, "What should I do? I'm a Jew. I had a Jewish name, I'm an ex-(?), I mean, ex-Austrian. If somebody looks at my papers, that's an absolutely anti-Hitler declaration, I'm in jeopardy. What should I do? Should I go back to Paris or not? You know what he said, "Why don't you declare yourself German? You will have all the advantages." So that was the trend. Anyway, we didn't want to stay there. I saw Goering on the Champs d'Elysees, you know. So we wanted to leave. But to get a visa-- Plus, you know, it was very hard to get. Only my brother lived here in the United States, and he provided us with a visa. DALLETT: When did he come to this country? KENT: In '39, '38. So he got us a visa for the three of us. DALLETT: Was that difficult for him to do? KENT: It wasn't that difficult because, uh, he had a, it was, they had two kinds of visa. Either you have a family, I mean, family in any case, but you could have, uh, I don't know how they called it. If you had some money out here, you could have a, I don't know how you call it. With money you could do all kinds of things. So with money guaranteed here, you could get a visa. And the Czech quota wasn't as bad as the Polish quota or the austrian quota. You know, I don't know whether you know this quota system. Uh, anyway, so he sent us all the necessary, he thought, all the necessary papers. Now it comes the American Consulate. You had to stand in line about at five o'clock in the morning. I mean, the weather wasn't bad, so it was all right. DALLETT: This was in Paris now? KENT: That was in Marseilles, no, sorry. I went to Marseilles, which was so-called unoccupied zone. To get to Marseilles, my husband was in Marseilles when he was released from the, from the Foreign Legion, uh, it was like a dream to go there, freedom all of a sudden in the unoccupied zone, but you couldn't get there so easily. Some people told me I can walk over that thing and then the guy who was supposed to take me over said no, it became too dangerous. anyway, my father, as Czech, somehow got a visa to get to the, you know, from the occupied zone into the unoccupied zone. And, uh, for him, his wife, and his daughter. I mean, somehow we made it. They were not one hundred percent tight. Because we made it the week where all the Jews had to go and have their papers signed with a big "J". So we didn't go there. DALLETT: It was the week before that this happened, you mean? KENT: No, we just didn't go. I think it was that week. That I don't know exactly any more, but it doesn't matter. So we came to the unoccupied zone, which was also quite dangerous because, uh, we stayed in one in Marseilles, we stayed in one hotel, and they came checking, the French police, in the middle of the night, at four o'clock, knock, knock, knock, and you had to show your papers. So we didn't like that hotel, so we went into a furnished room. And in the furnished room they found us, too and, uh, my husband had to go to the police. and our, always, if you don't come back, you know what you are. So, anyway, he came back. They didn't find anything, because he was in the Foreign Legion, he had a few pluses there. But anyway, this was no climate to stay. DALLETT: How was it that you avoided going to wherever you had to go to get the "J" stamped on your card? KENT: I mean, you had to go and volunteer. DALLETT: Was it voluntary? KENT: Yeah, I think so, until, you know, in the beginning. It was volunteer, in the beginning. I mean, they would have caught up with us once, you know, they couldn't check everybody, but maybe in a little, in a month they would have checked. I don't know. And so we went to the American Consulate, stood in line. At two o'clock they closed up, or three o'clock. And you didn't get a number. You had to start the next day all over again if you didn't make it. So we stood the next day again. We had nothing else to do, so we were standing in line. Finally we got in, and there was a guy who looked at our papers and said something in half English which we didn't get, you know. I mean, our English was absolutely from school and, I mean, how much do you understand. I said, "What did you say?" "Next, please." So we had to go stand in line the next day again. You know, you didn't even know what was wrong. Until you got to the last, I don't know. And then, finally, the next time I think I understood and he told me there was some paper missing. So we cabled New York and we finally got the answer. Uh, then we went, stood in line again, you know. Then we went to the next guy. And he said, "Oh, this is missing." I mean, they didn't tell us at the first whatever is missing. Always was something missing. It took from January to July before we got the visa because they were always missing something. And, in the meantime, it was quite dangerous. They picked up people and sent them to concentration camps. The French. So, I mean, that was, it was a dangerous living. We made it. And finally it was a Catch 22 to get, uh, a ticket for the boat. You didn't get, couldn't get a ticket if you didn't have a visa, you didn't get the visa if you didn't have a ticket. You know, somehow we could overcome, I don't know. You become very smart in such things. Anyway, we got a ticket, we paid five hundred dollars a person one way, 1941. Uh, there was a, uh, Spanish freighter leaving from Cadis, supposedly in July. And we got the visa, and we had to get the Spanish, uh, transit visa which we got. Having an American visa they let you transit. But it's always standing in line. I mean, that always, we did that. So we went to Spain. We went to Cadis and we were all excited, so where is the boat, there is no trace of the boat. DALLETT: Now, who's in Cadis at this point? Your mother and father, too? KENT: Yes. DALLETT: Okay. The four of you? KENT: The four of us. And people we met on the train going to that same boat. DALLETT: Was there ever any thought that you would give up trying to get to America and try to go somewhere else? KENT: Yes. I mean, we tried Argentina. You had to be baptized to go to Argentina. They wouldn't accept you any other way. We were kind of late. I mean, many people immigrated when Hitler came to power in 1933. That was 1940. It was very difficult, and all the other, you know, Canada you couldn't get in, Australia God knows what. I mean, you, it was impossible. And, as my brother was here, we didn't discriminate at that time at all. That was the, the one way. And we succeeded. I know quite a number of people who didn't succeed. So, if you ask this, this is the success story with all the troubles in between. It's good to be here to be able to tell you. And, uh, so we had to wait, I think a month before the ship even appeared. There was a committee forming and finding out--(?), they said "No, it doesn't leave Cadis, it leaves Civilia." Now Civilia is an island, it's not on the ocean. Cadis, is. So we all went to Civilia. and when we saw that ship, it was a rusty old freighter. five thousand ton, accommodation for freight. You know, there were two sides with a big hole in each side, scales, or whatever, I don't know. And around it was merchandise was lying. And the cranes took the stuff. We were not allowed to take our luggage along. Just, just your toothbrush and maybe one change of clothes, I think, we must have. The men were in the front and the women in the back, maybe, and we were twelve hundred people on that thing. There were about three or four cabins on that boat. One was occupied by the doctor, the other by the nurse, and maybe two more, well, by the captain and, I don't know. There were bunks. Uh, I don't know how you call them, upper and lower bunk. There was a little mattress, half inch thick, of grass, and one sheet. No pillow, no cover, nothing. That was your accommodation. DALLETT; Were most of the people who were traveling, these other twelve hundred people, were they in the similar situation to what you were? KENT: The same. Yeah. And, uh, we were about eight hundred women and, uh, maybe five hundred men. I don't know. I didn't count them. anyway, they were separate. We had, uh, you know, there was no (?) life. If you were lucky to have a bed, if you call it, near the opening, you got some air. If you were in the back it was pitch dark and no air, and it was very hot and humid down there. And, uh-- DALLETT: What was the name of the boat? KENT: Navemar. DALLETT: Navemar. KENT: Yeah. And, uh, yes, I, somebody had the good idea to say, to buy a little washbasin, bought a little enamel washbasin. That saved me, too. I bought this, and now I don't know whether they said we should buy some deck chairs, or they had them for sale on the boat. I don't know. But that's where we lived the whole trip, on that, on deck. It was, you couldn't walk through, the people, it was so full. But we couldn't stay down there. It was too hot and humid and, on that same mattress for six weeks, no change, was pretty bad. The dining room, so called, was all the way down, you couldn't even breathe, it was so hot. And the attendants, (she laughs), I don't know where they picked them up. They were so filthy. You know, they must have worked in the machine room and serve at the same time. And in the same evening we got stuck on a sandbank already because that boat was too big for the-- Anyway, we got out of this. But at the same, there were, for the women, were about six sinks in the bathroom, and six toilets. They were all clogged the same evening, the sinks and the bathroom. And it was pitch dark in the bathroom. You didn't know, when you had to go, where was what. Now, I had my little basin so at least I could put a little water into it, salt water. And these were the marvelous accommodations. Now, we were very young at the time and we, most of them were not young, because most of the passengers were old parents and so forth, where the kids, which had stuck it out, and the kids let them come. You know, there were not many young people on that boat. And there were some old people who never got up. The forty, to make it, it took six weeks, because the boat had taken a (?) or whatever, a month. Many of the visas were running out. And usually if it's, if it's expired, you cannot renew it. But it was special circumstances and the one committee formed of passengers was in touch with somebody. Anyway, we stopped in Lisbon. We were not allowed to get off the ship. And we were outside Lisbon and it was hot. If you don't move, uh, the sun comes down, there was no rain or anything. Uh, and the few people whose visas expired were allowed to get out. And there was one pregnant woman didn't get the visa, she had to stay in Lisbon. Her husband was waiting for her in New York. anyway, I hope she made it later, I don't know. So we were about almost a week in Lisbon, standing there. And, uh, then we left and the next stop was Bermuda. And in the Bermudas they let out the very sick people. The British gave them visas and they let them out. I don't know how many, and I don't know how many survived. But I know the very first man to die of a heart attack was, one elderly man. And, and then I understand forty died like this. We didn't know who and what. You didn't know the people, there were too many, and they did that during the night, of course. The food was inedible. Filthy and inedible. So, I mean, we all stopped eating, kind of. And that weakens your condition and so, uh-- DALLETT: So these forty people that died, they died because of the conditions? KENT: No, they must of died of heart, typhoid fever, which I contracted but didn't know it was at the time. It must have been that. Uh, there were little incidents, human beings and this mess, you know, very upsetting. Instead of sticking together they were fighting, and so forth. Which was understandable. Everybody was under a terrible nervous strain. And then we went first, before New York, we went to Cuba to deposit some people. That was before Fidel Castro. Some people had Cuban visas and we let them out there. And then it took about a week to get to New York. And that week I got sick. I took sick, I was badly sick. Uh, I was so weak, and I had to lie on my bunk there with six hundred people around me. And the man, I mean, by that time the men were helping their wives. My husband came, I mean, there was no, nobody cared. You know, you didn't know anymore who's who and where's what. And, uh, I was in very poor condition, couldn't eat, didn't want to eat.. And there was, I won't forget, the daughter of Marc Chagal was there, I forgot her first name. anyway, she heard of my sickness, and she came and she and I had a few canned fruit juices, which she gave me. And that's all I had for a week, I think. DALLETT: Any medical attention? KENT: None. None. The doctor didn't show. There was one doctor for them all and, uh, he didn't show. Yes, he showed the last day, the evening before we got into New York. He came to me and said when the immigration people will ask me what's wrong with me I should say, I, since last night I didn't feel well. That's what he told me. And the nurse came and brought me a pillow. I said, "I don't want that pillow. I don't know, I didn't get it all this time, I don't want it now." And, uh, it was pretty dramatic because when we landed in New York, uh, everybody was excited and, and so forth, getting dressed and leave and I just couldn't get up. I couldn't. I don't know, I don't think I went to the bathroom. I just couldn't. Um, usually they take the sick ones out first. They didn't in that case. I was lying there, very sick. The, there was a crane above me, to take the luggage out, and that noise drove me absolutely insane. I was just underneath. All day long, that noise, and I almost, if I wouldn't have been too weak I would have been screaming. And my brother was supposed to pick us up. And my husband was running outside looking and kept trying to get me out, and they promised there will be an ambulance. Nothing happened. And all of a sudden, it was all dark, and it got very still, the crane, everybody was out of the boat except me. And, uh, there came a policeman. I'll never forget. A very fat black one and he said, "Come on, lady. Everything's going to be all right." he was, he was adorable at the same time because I think I was crying. And then it was again very still, and then all of a sudden I hear a whistle, and that was my brother. We always signaled ourselves from far. I mean, he was standing on the other side, but it was so still I heard him whistle. So, of course, I stopped crying. I said, "The whole world didn't forget me." And, uh, my husband went there and he asked, "What do you want? What can I do?" He wanted a sandwich. I mean, we hadn't eaten, and cigarettes, which my brother gave him. And I couldn't eat. I just absolutely couldn't eat. And the next morning. I mean, they left me really stranded there. The next morning it was, the ship was completely empty, and I was lying there, and I saw the rats crawling all over, all over under the bunks, and there was food, maybe some crumbs from God knows what lying around. And finally they came with the stretcher and ambulance. DALLETT; We just have to say, I just want to say this, that is the end of side one of Interview Number 88 with Lotte Kent. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO DALLETT: This is the beginning of side two of Interview Number 88 with Lotte Kent. KENT: I thin that boat must have landed on the cheapest pier of New York. It was deep in the heart of Brooklyn somewhere. And the ambulance took me to the Ellis Island ferry. It was quite a long trip, and I remember looking out of the window and I only saw fire escapes. Ugly buildings with fire escapes. That was my first impression of the United States. And they took me on the Ellis Island ferry on a stretcher. DALLETT: Was your brother with you? KENT: No, he wasn't, but my husband was with me. And then we arrived on Ellis Island and then they told my husband, "You have to go there." And I was taken to the hospital. He was very upset that he couldn't be with me and I was very upset that they left me alone. Red tape. It couldn't be helped. So they took me to the hospital in a, in a private room, I think. That was the navy hospital at the time. And they had just the ward and maybe one extra room or something, and I was in the extra room. And the nurse wanted to give me a bath in the worst way. I needed it. She, I had bed sores and a high temperature and so, of course, she didn't. I forgot to tell you, when the doctors and nurses came on board ship the day before, when they didn't pick me up, they couldn't believe it. The filth and the mess and so forth. I forgot, and they didn't pick me up, but they came and looked. DALLETT: The American doctors. KENT: The American doctors. And the nurses wore white, and white's something I didn't see for a long time. But they, uh-- DALLETT: Why didn't they pick you up then? KENT: I don't know. DALLETT: Did they know you had typhoid fever at that point? KENT: No, no. DALLETT: You didn't know that. KENT: No, no. I had just a high temperature, but they didn't know. And they couldn't get over it. They were so much in awe that, I don't know, they forgot what they were supposed to do or not, I don't know. And some reporters came, too, the day. And in my best English I told them that the pillow was just for them, and that I don't know any more what else I said. Maybe I said it in French, maybe I said it in German, I don't know. Anyway, I was in that hospital and I was asking for my husband and they say your visiting twice a week, one hour, you know. I didn't see him, and he didn't know what was wrong with me. He was in the immigration, as everybody else was who has troubles, in that big hall. And, uh, then came doctors, specialists. And I had to speak English and that was, I didn't know English well enough. And if you have typhoid fever, which I found out later, you are so weak, talking is too much of a strain. It was very difficult. They couldn't, I mean, in X-rays and everything, they really did. And after a day or two they told me I had typhoid fever. And I thought that's the end. You know, I didn't know what typhoid fever was. I started to cry, so young, and to die, it was very sad. But, uh, the cure, in 1941, was one glass of juice every hour. There was no medication. It didn't exist yet. Nothing. If my heart wouldn't have been good enough I wouldn't have made it. And like this I was three months in Ellis Island. The first month or two I was pretty sick, and I couldn't eat. When I, you know, they had to feed me. And when I had jello, which I do eat now, when I saw it I got sick, that wobbly thing. It was terrible. I said, "Put it away." I couldn't even look at it. What I saw out of my window was a brick wall. And during foggy nights there was these foghorns and I couldn't sleep. Plus the timing was so bad there. You were terribly alone. Breakfast was at five. Lunch, whatever it was, was at eleven, and dinner was at four. And then five minutes after four, when I was through not eating, nothing happened any more. DALLETT: How often could your husband come to see you? KENT: Twice a week, one hour. And, uh, the terrible thing, they didn't let me read because it would have been too strenuous for my eyes under the circumstances. So then, uh, my husband was, I think, a week at Ellis Island. I don't know exactly how long. They didn't want to separate husband and wife. So they didn't let him emigrate without me. But, uh, my brother or some friends got a bond for him, so he was let go on bond, temporarily. So he, they left him free. And when they discharged me he had to come back and then we both together entered the country legally. But I got letters from people from the boat, they all had jobs already and God knows why I was still on Ellis Island, you know, it was upsetting. Especially nothing to do. I discovered, uh, what was her name, Bella, oh, yesterday I knew it. One of the soap operas on radio, Stella Dallas. You never heard of her? DALLETT: No. KENT: Oh, you weren't born yet. Of course not. That was a radio soap opera. And all the most tragic things happened, happened to her, of course. It was a good English lesson. And QXR I listened. But that was the only amusement, I mean, radio, radio, radio. That was the only thing I could do. The doctors were extremely nice, extremely nice and cared, and the nurses too. And the nurses always called me dear and darling and honey. I said they must love me. Later I found out everybody's a honey and a dear and a darling. But I took it personal. When I got a little better I had, I had one terrible gall bladder attack. They typhoid fever, they like the gall bladder. And, I understand that's in connection with it. They couldn't do anything, they couldn't operate. During an acute case of typhoid fever they couldn't do anything. So it was a little, very painful, also. But then they, uh, the last few weeks, I could get up. I wanted to help to make my beds and the nurses wouldn't let me. I shouldn't have strained. Maybe these days they have other ideas how people recover, but at that time, '41, I wasn't allowed to do anything because it would be, the heart wasn't strong enough, or something, I don't know. So, no good for anything. I'm standing there at the door, one day, of my room. I wasn't allowed to go out with my (?). There was, across the street was another room, and they left it open for a moment. And I looked, and I saw the skyline. I'd never seen it in my life. I was overwhelmed. It was dark, and it looked, from Ellis Island the skyline is very impressive. You know, I didn't see the Statue of Liberty either when I arrived. But this skyline, I'll never forget it. I still see it. Later, then, when I was fine, I played arrival and took the Staten Island Ferry. Played arrival to see the Statue of Liberty. After all, that's what you have to see when you arrive. And, uh, the last few weeks I saw well enough, when they had people, uh, I made the rounds with the doctor. They had, the ward was full of people, it was French and Polish and German. And so I was translating into my perfect English. The Polish, I mean, I speak a little Czech, so that was good enough, and French and German. So, I finally learned what bowel movement was and things like this, so I could translate. So there was a little something going on. But I can't complain about the hospital at all. That there were no drugs was not their fault. DALLETT: What happened to your mother and father when you came to Ellis Island? KENT: They were, my mother, father was pretty sick. I came out on the second of December and he was operated on, he was a mess, too. They were pretty sick. And my father's parents, somehow, my father never got used to the United States, no. That was a sad chapter but that would go too far into things. So, I mean, on the second of December they let me out. And we lived in furnished room on 74th Street where my brother had lived before, which was quite nice. And, uh, my husband, at that time, got a job, if you're interested in that, which only a greenhorn would accept. The minimum wage at that time was thirty cents an hour, and that's what he got for night shift cutting calves' stomachs for the production of rennet for cheese. Uh, during the night. So when he came in the morning it was, the smell on his clothes was just incredible. And that was twelve dollars a week he got. I got a job, you know, unskilled. I didn't have a, you know, if you, I didn't have a line, I didn't know, I mean, languages, but that didn't help at that time. The war had just broken out. So I came and got a job at Brownie Greeting Cards and I put twelve cards into twelve envelopes with cellophane around it for fifteen dollars. Now, he made twelve and I made fifteen and we could live quite okay with this. The subway was five cents and a loaf of bread was nine cents. I remember that. So, but then I got a better job all of a sudden that, a long story. I got a job as a, for the lettering in an engineering office. And I was offered twenty-five dollars, like that. So I was very rich. And then it was 1942 and my husband, who was thirty-eight, not quite thirty-eight, two months before thirty-eight, was drafted into the Army. Thirty-eight was the limit at the time. He was drafted into the Army and he was in the Army for four years. So, and I worked in New York there. So that was that story. DALLETT: You had become a citizen at that point? KENT: Yes. Because my husband, being in the Army, became a citizen almost right away, and as I was then married to an American citizen I got it in two or three years. DALLETT: So they gave him his citizenship within his first year and then drafted him? KENT: Oh, yes. No, no, they drafted, he became a citizen when he was a soldier. DALLETT: Yeah. KENT: As I was married, then, to an American citizen, I got it after two or three years. I don't know any more. DALLETT: What was your name, uh, when you came through Ellis Island? Was there any name change there? KENT: We changed the name to Stafford. DALLETT: What happened-- KENT: Anyway, our name was Schecter, and we had the worst time in France. It was so terrible to spell it, they couldn't, when I called my Chester, like the cheese. And then we decided we won't have this trouble, we didn't speak English very well, and we looked at the telephone book in Marseilles and it had Stafford, with an "S", and we thought Statfford sounds great. Now, when you take out your first papers and you change your name, it's easy, you can pick anything you want to. Only when you live, then, the first few months, and your name is very New England and you have an accent and you can't even pronounce your own name properly it was embarrassing. But it was too late to do anything about it. (They laugh.) So we were Stafford then, until, uh, yes. Then I had a child, 1947 and 1949 I was abandoned by my husband. Luckily. (She laughs.) I didn't think, at that time, but it was for the best. And I lived fifteen years alone. Supported myself without any alimony, supported myself and my son, and luckily I found the right guy and I'm married now to Francis Kent. So I married twenty-one years ago, again, the second time. Uh, what else? That's all. And they lived happily ever after. (They laugh.) DALLETT: How long was it, uh, before you felt, uh, Americanized? KENT: Pretty fast. You know, I'm a chameleon, and that's past experience. I lived in Czechoslovakia, I lived in Germany, right after the war, and nobody did, my parents or my brother, nobody liked the food I ate, anything. You know, I, uh, I can easily assimilate. And then I lived in France and I was very French and then I came to the States and I'm very American, and I would never go back to anywhere else. But for me, personally, as I never look back, it was no, my English had to improve, but that was about it. But as I had a job, and I had to speak English, that was made easier. No, I had no problem I think. Because, as I said, I tried to make the best of whatever it is, and so I made the best of it. And I like it here. I still do. DALLETT: Okay. (Break in tape.) KENT: I have the affidavit and you have passport because I had no passport. They, I had become Austrian and that wasn't valid. So the visa was in there. DALLETT: And that was issued in '41? KENT: That was issued in '41 at the American Consulate in Marseilles. And then, of course, I have the citizenship papers and birth certificate or something. You're nor interested. No, that's all in the, I mean, my old stuff from Prague wouldn't interest you. DALLETT: What is it you have from there? KENT: I have my birth certificate and I have my, uh, yeah, that's about it. My divorce decree. That wouldn't interest you. (They laugh.) DALLETT: We were just asking for the National Park Service, okay. That is the end of side two of Interview Number 88 with Lotte Kent.