SIGRIST:Good afternoon. This is Paul Sigrist for the National Park Service. Today is February 25th, 1994. I’m in Brooklyn at the Shore Road Senior Citizen’s complex with Margaret Kirk. Mrs. Kirk came from Scotland in 1923 when she was twenty-two. Anyway thank you for having us out. Mrs. Kirk, can we begin by you giving me your birth date? KIRK:My birth date is 1901. December 25th. SIGRIST:A Christmas baby. KIRK:Christmas morning. I was thrown down the chimney. SIGRIST:Did your, did your mother ever tell you any stories about when she was carrying you or when she gave birth to you? KIRK:Well, she was all one when she, she, my husb-, father had gone to work. And the, she, the pains came on her. And she, everybody got their babies born in the house in these days. You didn’t go to hospitals. So she had to call the midwife or the doctor. I don’t’ know which one did it. And he was born right in the apartment on the, I think on the kitchen table they used to do it. (she laughs) But anyhow, no, I, that’s, that’s how she, and after that, I don’t know what happened after that. But I remember when I was a little, a very, she told, this is what I was told when I was little. I don’t know if you want to hear all this. I used to think, I was told that Santa Claus has brought me because I was born in Christmas morning. And I believed it. Oh, believed it. And my mother used to say, you know, I came down, I came up, wakened up in the morning and I came through to the kitchen, and you see, the night before they pack all the, they pack, the, the, when there’s an open fire, they pack it with the, the, the coal that has been burned from the day before. And they put it on with paper and, and the sticks. And when they, when they come in they just put a light to it. Then it slowly begins to come. So she said she came in to do that. And here she saw this thing, a bag or something lying on the hearth stone. She said, ‘Well, what, what,’ she went over to it, and here there was a little squeak. Oh, it was a baby. And she said, ‘A baby. Santa Claus has sent us a baby.’ So I always believed that Santa Claus has sent me down the chimney. (unintelligible) And I tell all the kids in the street that I was born, Santa Claus sent me down. So after, in a couple, a few years, I don’t know, maybe I’d be four. I don’t know what exactly age, what age I, age it was. But the kids used to say, ‘Oh, there’s no Santa Claus. You don’t, you never,’ so I came in crying to my mother. I said, ‘They don’t believe that I was, that Santa Claus sent me.’ She says, ‘Oh, that’s ridiculous.’ So she arranged to have a party for all the children. And my father was an engineer. There’s all that brass, you can see it. And he laid a, a wire way up the chimney. Way, way up the chimney and right down the side of the grate of the, of the range. Right along, like a big room. It was as big as this. (she indicates the room) The fire, the kitchen, the fireplace would be over there, and eh had it right to here. And while the party was going on, my mother said, ‘Who said that, that, that Margaret wasn’t sent down by Santa Claus?’ So each one didn’t want to, they all said they didn’t say it, you know. She said, ‘Well, I’ll just verify it.’ So while she got them all excited, she got them over, ‘Now, you come over. Margaret, you come to the fireplace, and you talk.’ My father had planted a, a naked doll way up the chimney. And when, when, he had the wire attached to it. And when we went to talk to, so I, I said, ‘Santa Claus, will you please send me,’ I can remember it. (she laughs) (unintelligible) ‘I, I, will you please send me down a naked doll that my mammie can dress?’ So there all standing around the fireplace, their eyes open. Suddenly the first thing you saw were the feet, the feet coming down. Then the legs. Then a little bit. And they’re all, my mother said she, she watched their expression. And they’re all just stay, and e-, and slowly, and slowly, and slowly down came the doll. (she gasps) ‘See? Santa Claus, Margaret is Santa, is, is one of Santa Claus’ special people.’ And he sent that down, so, you see, we talked to Santa Claus. Santa Claus sent it down. Well, they couldn’t believe that there was a Santa Claus. By this time they were at the stage, ‘No Santa Claus, no Santa Claus. Your mother and father made, do the things.’ So they all went away from the party convinced there was a Santa Claus. SIGRIST:Oh, what a wonderful story that is. KIRK:And the, of course, as I grew older I knew I, I said, I was, up until then I was so convinced that Santa Claus had sent me down the chimney. (she laughs) That’s a laugh. SIGRIST:What town were you born in in Scotland? KIRK:Glasgow, Scotland. SIGRIST:You were born in Glasgow? KIRK:Yeah. I lived, I was on the south side of Glasgow. Plantation. The Plantation district. They called it Plantation in the, in the south of, of Glasgow. SIGRIST:Can you describe, did you live in the same for a long time? KIRK:No, I, I was brought up in an apartment house. It would be about, maybe two, maybe six people. Two in one (unintelligible) and two in another, maybe six people in the building. SIGRIST:Can you describe your apartment for me? KIRK:Oh, my mother, my mother was a french polisher. And she had her own business. She used to have thirty girls working for her. SIGRIST:You’re talking about furniture? French polishing furniture? KIRK:French polishing is, is, no, this is varnished. (she refers to her chair) But, but french polishing is they, they take the, the wood, right into the bare wood. And they nourish it with, with oil, with the different oils and different things. They let him do like that for weeks. And when it’s all beautifully soaked in, then they start putting the polish on. And the polish isn’t paint, painted on. It’s put on with a rubber. A, a cotton rubber. It’s, it’s for furniture. And they do like that to get, to get the, the thing in. (she gestures) No painted [sic]. No painting or anything like that. So she, she used, she did all, did all the British Indie boats, coming from India. And then the brain steamers. They were the, the steamers that went up to the Hebrides. She had the contract for all these people. So we, what was I talking about the furniture? (she laughs) SIGRIST:Your mo-, your mother was a french polisher. KIRK:Yeah, but where did I get, what did I say about, what, what brought that on? I don’t remember what I was going to say about that. But anyhow she... SIGRIST:Your mother had her own business. KIRK:Yeah. She had her own business. And then, but, but she, and the friend did that. But he, I was going to tell something... SIGRIST:You, we started to talk about that apartment. That’s how you were reminded... KIRK:Oh, yes. Yes. Well, she had an apartment. Everything in our house was french polished. If you passed a piece of furniture you could stand and see your dress. You could see where it, it was so shiny. And we had a piano, and we had chairs, and everything. Of course, you always had three or four rooms. Your bedrooms were always apart. So, so that, but in the living room, and then I’d, my father, we had all that brass. He was a brass fini-, he was an engineer and a brass finisher. And he made, everything he made, around our kitchen, he, kitchen, the fireplace, we had a great big brass thing, right, went right round the top. Because don’t remember, they had to wash in their own, well, they had a wash, a wash in the back yard. You could go down with your clothes and wash them. But no electric things or anything like that. You went down and put your stuff in and washed them with that board, you know, and did that. And then the, so he, but in, but in, so that when, often times when you washed things, there would still be a little, needing to be a little aired. So they used to put them around this thing above the fireplace, maybe through the night. It wouldn’t, it wouldn’t be wet. It would just need a little airing. And so that there was, that was all, that was, oh, lots of people had them, but nothing like ours. It was all brass. All brass. Beautiful. And then we had a fire, a fender. It was all brass. My father made it. A great, big, brass fender. And that, that was all. Anything, anything around the fireplace was in brass. SIGRIST:This is a very shiny apartment... KIRK:Oh. SIGRIST:...between the brass and the furniture. KIRK:I had to clean. Don’t kid yourself. I had to clean it... SIGRIST:How did you clean brass then? KIRK:Eh? SIGRIST:How did you clean brass at that time? KIRK:With brassel [PH]. Brassel. You see, it was always been brassel. And that was one of my Friday night jobs. Cleaning the brass. So, my mother did it too, of course. But he, then he, we had a shelf, we had a, they delivered your coal. They called it a bunker. The coal came up the street crying, ‘Coal. Coal,’ you know, and then you went down and you picked up a bag of coal and took it up to the house. And you, everybody had a bunker. They called it the coal bunker. And then another thing here that had drawers in it. (she indicates) Well, in the coal bunker, everybody just would have that painted. You know, just, but my mother had it polished. The top of that was like a side board. It was like a side board in the kitchen. And all above the side board she had shelves, two big shelves, with the brass and then again, she had, she made her own jam. So we had our brass, jam, dish, great big one that size. (she indicates) Then she had four smaller ones. They all came down on the wall. And these, these, these, you must have seen the old pictures, maybe in the movies. These big estates where they put the covers over the roast beef. Well, this was the same thing. Everything on that wall was brass. And it was put over, if you had a lot of food, you put over them, you know, and (unintelligible) clean and put back. So we had our bunker and this, it was all, she had everything there. People’d come into the kitchen, it didn’t look like a kitchen. You know, she had the fireplace was nice, and this was nice. So we, but I always remember that. SIGRIST:Did you cook in the fireplace or did you have a range in the... KIRK:No, you cook, we had a range, but you didn’t, you didn’t have a, need to have a range. It was just a fire. In some houses it was just a fireplace. And you, oh, yes, you had a fireplace and then a stove that was next to the fireplace. Just a stove, a, low down, low, low. The fireplace was there and the stove was there. (she indicates) You see, and you could, you could bake, you could roast, you could do anything in that. But the, oh, yes, the gas. Gas pipe was put round. You had the fireplace to work on, but the gas company put up a light right round your fireplace so that you could put it on to different temperatures, you know. And... SIGRIST:That was a great advancement, wasn’t it, in those times. KIRK:Oh, yes. So, they, they, she could put in, she could, in a roast, she had, one Christmas they, she roasted a, a goose. A goose. But she had to leave the door open, because it wasn’t big enough. It wasn’t big enough. She put paper all around where it was open, you know, to keep it hot. But you could do anything like that. And then on the, on the top of the stove with the gas, you usually had a little gas ring that you could, you could boil a kettle fast, you know, if you didn’t want to, but if you didn’t, you always had a, a tea kettle on the side of the hobb. There was always a kettle ready to be used. It was always was boiling a little bit. You could use it anytime and make a cup of tea. So we, they did, they didn’t have the things that they have nowadays, but they made out very well, let me tell you. SIGRIST:How did you light your apartment? KIRK:Oh, these, when I was little we were light-, it was with gas. SIGRIST:How did the gas light work? KIRK: A man came, you had a, a, a canister thing on the wall. And you put a penny or whatever the, yeah, a penny, a penny, it was pennies, but it would be a nickel or whatever it was. They put it in and that gave you the gas. That, that went around wherever, oh, you didn’t have a whole lot of, you had a gas, you might have, usually in the ceiling. And it shined the whole room. There was no, no people with lamps light this. No, no. And the, you put your money in there and it lit the whole room up. And the, that, that’s where we got the gas. SIGRIST:Was gas light dangerous? KIRK:We, oh, when you had to, all on the top, if you did happen to have a, a lamp, or whatever it was, you had to have what you call a little white thing that went over the top of, it wasn’t, it wasn’t a bulb like that. (she indicates) SIGRIST:Like a globe? KIRK:It put over, it put over, and it, whatever it did, it must have consumed any gas smell or anything like that. I don’t know why. I’ve never, I’ve never even asked. I’ve never even asked because I’ve seen it all my life. And, but that was, we heated the thing, the, the gas was in a container, and you put your money in and you got the gas. And then you made your food on, on the stove. Gas ring around the stove. You could bake. My mother baked. She made... SIGRIST:Talk to me, you said she made jam. How did your mother make jam? KIRK:Well, she took that great, big brass thing. She put it in a big, a big boil, a big, another, an iron pot. Big pot. And she had, the men used to come up and down the street and yell, ‘Strawberries for sale. Raspberries for sale. Gooseberries,’ and all this. So people used to buy them off the, the, the boy, the men. They (unintelligible), they couldn’t have that. And then you had raspberry jam. And then she would get, I don’t know how she made it. I don’t have the recipe for the jam. But she made it and stirred it and stirred it that big brass pan until it was right. Then they had jars. You never bought jam in the stores. Never. We always had a shelf with all kinds of jams. And they put over them the paper to keep the for, and a lid on them. There was paper, wax paper that you put on them, and a lid on them. And they stayed on the shelves for, for years. I mean, they never went bad, you know. SIGRIST:Can you tell me a little bit about what, what average Scottish food is like? What did you eat on a daily basis? KIRK:We, we, we ate porridge. Oatmeal. I still do it, every morning. Oatmeal. You could get a boiled egg, or bacon and egg if you wanted. And then for lunch they, they went in for a lot of chopped beef. But they didn’t call it chopped beef. They called it minced. M-I-N, N-I-C-E, or, N-I-S-E. Mince. Mince. And it was made onions. Plenty of onions in it. And then you got that with boi-, with boiled potatoes. They always boiled them in the skins. Boiled potatoes and a vegetable. Not every, that was one meal. Then the, that was a great favorite, a great, mince is a great favorite in Scotland. And then the, we had sausages. And my mother made her own soup, same as I do. I made my own soup. She made her own soup. And we, she baked. She used to put veal, shoulder of veal in the oven. We always got all these things. We cooked everything. Veal, pork, meat. And rabbit. SIGRIST:How would she prepare a rabbit? KIRK:Well, that was, it would be all the skin before would be all off it. Well, they just washed it well and cleaned any bloody bits that were around it. And he put, put it, took it apart the same as you would a chicken. And they just stewed it. Well, I don’t make stewed chicken, but I don’t admit it, but that’s not, and they just, they didn’t put it, cooked it just like stew. And you could have chipped rabbit with potatoes and a vegetable. They get, they, well, they did it, it was mostly in the country that they had rabbit. But you could, every butcher had rabbits and hares hanging up. But hare is, hare, I don’t like that, that’s what you call the German Hasenpfeffer. No, no. We, we never had that. We just was very, very, very, very, tender. More tender than some chickens. And we got, well, we ate everything. SIGRIST:Tell me what she would cook for a, for a Christmas dinner or a big event. KIRK:Well, she would make, maybe get a great big hen. Hen, hen. Or, or, we wouldn’t talk about turkeys in these days. You could get a turkey if you (unintelligible). It was, she made a goose one year. That’s what she did. SIGRIST:And that was a treat? KIRK:Well, she had another, another, a man and his wife came over and stayed over night. And then we all, and some neighbors were in and they all had a big dinner, you know. But, no, she made the, she was great for making hens. They called them hens. Not chickens. Hens. They were, we ate everything the same as everybody else. SIGRIST:Since we’re talking about your mother, what was her name? KIRK:Her name was Ann MacLaren. SIGRIST:Can you... KIRK:A-N-N. SIGRIST:Yeah. MacLaren? KIRK:M-A-C-L-A-R-E-N. MacLaren. SIGRIST:And is that her maiden name or is that her married name? KIRK:That was her maiden name. Ann MacLaren. SIGRIST:And her married name, your maiden name... KIRK:Was (unintelligible) was, she was married to Robert Jack. J-A-C-K. SIGRIST:Jack. So that’s your maiden name? KIRK:That’s, my name is Jack. Margaret Jack. SIGRIST:So her full name was Ann MacLaren Jack? KIRK:Yeah. She had, she had, I think she had, what did she have, (unintelligible). No, but, I was, I was christened Margaret Seaton... SIGRIST:Spell that, please. KIRK:Write that, my name was Margaret Seaton, S-E-A-T-O-N. SIGRIST:Yeah. KIRK:Seaton Menzies, M-E-N-Z-I-E-S, Rutherford. Oh, I gave you lots of names. Rutherford Jack. SIGRIST:Can you tell me why you have all these names? What do they signify? KIRK:Well, my mother, my grandmother had worked, or was well acquainted with Lady Menzies. And Seaton, somebody else in the family had to do with Seaton. But the Menzies was Lady Menzies. And she had, was practically cousins or friends of my, my grandmother. And for some reason or another I got Margaret Seaton. It was a very important name. And Menzies, it, they’re both, and Rutherford. Of course, really for years I always said Margaret Rutherford. I left these two out. I couldn’t be bothered. (unintelligible) So I just was Margaret Rutherford. But when I came here to America and got my citizen’s papers, they say, ‘Do you want them?’ I said, ‘Just say ‘Margaret Kirk.’’ And let it be done like that. So that’s why it was. But Margaret Rutherford Jack was my, even when I came here I was Margaret Rutherford Kirk. Because Rutherford is a very, a very important, Rutherford, the ra-, the race of Ruther-, Rutherfords are very important in Scotland. So, I don’t know, what else am I going to tell you. (she laughs) You must be tire listening to me. SIGRIST:Well, we have a long way to go. (she laughs) Tell me about your mother’s family background. Where did she come from, what were her people like? KIRK:My mother was born, she was also born in Govan. Govan. G-O-V-A-N. Govan, Glasgow. Glasgow. And was brought up by her, her fa-, her uncle, or her father and mother. It, just the same as I, the same, just, much the same as I was. SIGRIST:And do you remember her parents? KIRK:I... SIGRIST:Your grandparents on her side? KIRK:I don’t remember them. I remember my grandfather. SIGRIST:Her father? KIRK:Yes. I, I met him when I was a little girl of about ten. SIGRIST:What do you remember about him? KIRK:Well, he, he had been, I know about him. He went to the, to Africa. He was in the army in Africa. And he came home with plenty of money. And he bought a house down in, in, in Ayebrooks [PH] called Lendel, in Lendel Place. A little villa. And he, my mother used to say, ‘He must have robbed the dead bodies, because he hadn’t any money when he went.’ (she laughs) Well, anyhow, he had plenty of money when he came back. And he bought this house. I met him once. Once to my knowledge when he came to see my mother. I only saw, I only met him once. SIGRIST:So your mother really wasn’t close then with her father then if she... KIRK:No, no, because she had her own life with her husband. And her fa-, her mother had died when I was a baby. Her mother had died long before. I never saw her. In fact she died from influenza. She put me, she put, no, no, I get off, I get off the story. Anyhow, she, no, she, she kept in touch in with her mother, her mother. But her father, my father went, her husband went to Africa and was in the army. He joined the army and was in Africa. So that, but she didn’t see him much either. It was mostly the mother. And she had two sisters. Three, three sisters. And they all went and got married and went their way. I, I, I did meet them down in Lendel Place at the, once when she went down, she went down, my mother went down to see them. And they were there. SIGRIST:Are you saying ‘Lentil’ Place? KIRK:Lendel. L-E-N-D-E-L. Lendel Place in Ayebrooks. That’s part of Scotland of Glouchester, Glasgow. A very exclusive place. And I went with my mother that time because I think my mother had gone to Craighton [PH] Cemetery to look at her grave. And they’re not far from that. And we went in. And all that was bothering them that day was the dog wasn’t well. And it had a nice pillow. And it was getting special medicine. My mother used to say, ‘Good God, that’s all they have to do is waste their time with that dog.’ You know. But she, they dog was in a nice thing and it had a blanket on it. I was little and I was watching it. I can remember seeing it. And giving it this and that and that and that. They, they were, my mother was a business woman. They were more ladies. They, and they stayed with the grandfather when he had the house, and they, they lived it entire-, they, we never saw them. SIGRIST:Talk about your mother’s personaly it for me. KIRK:Oh, my mother has the same personality as I have. She had great, she was a good singer, and she was a very good entertainer, I mean, she was very, I do that. And she was very, very, she used to, when the, she, she could go to court. And the, the lawyers would say, ‘You should have been a lawyer.’ People would come to her and say, we couldn’t, couldn’t, can’t pay our rent. Or my husband’s out of work, and we can’t pay our rent. And so she would go to court and fight for them. She hadn’t a lawyers degree but she could fight. She had a business. She was a businesswoman. So we, she did a lot of that. And she did a lot of, she did a lot of humanitarian things in the district. She was always doing for people. Always doing for people. Like myself. I’m just beginning to get sense. I’m ninety-two. So I’m beginning to get sense. But... SIGRIST:How did she begin to get involved in business? KIRK:Well, I’ll tell you. She was a little girl. She was only about nine or ten. And in these days you didn’t go to college. There was none of that carry on. My fa-, my, my fa-, fa-, my grandfather who was a, a carpenter, he took her, she wanted to, she wanted, women at her age went in to be cooks and into, into domestics service. Not my mother. SIGRIST:Do know what year she was born? KIRK:Oh, I would have to look up, I would have to look her birth, her death certificates there. I have them. But I would have to look them all up. SIGRIST:Okay. So anyway, when she was a young girl? KIRK:(unintelligible) she was only, she was quite young. Because she was seventy-eight when she died. And I don’t know how many years that is again. But anyhow, she, she was a young girl. And a friend of my, my grandfather, she said, ‘I would like, I would, I would like to go in to, to do something. Learn to be a polisher or anything.’ He said, ‘I’m going to take you on a job, and you’re going to learn to do polishing.’ So he took her, this, this man was more interested in her that her own, her own father was. He wasn’t a bad father. He as a good father. But he took, he also was a carpenter, and he took her to, to, to, to places like that, to buildings. And she learned, she learned to, she learned her trade. SIGRIST:Like an apprentice almost. KIRK:She, she was an apprentice about nine years of age. And she learned her trade with the other people who did french polishing. She learned her trade and she went ahead. And then when she was, I think she was fifteen when she started her own business. And this man also helped her. And she went, and she started her own business at fifteen. And did lots of work, get, she evidently had the knack of, of getting things, whatever it was. SIGRIST:Well, and this is an unusual thing for a woman at this time. KIRK:In her, in her day and age nobody went out to business. You were cloistered. You either went in to be a maid in a house, or you went in to learn cooking in a house, or you went to study, study baking, or something like that. But nobody went, ventured out into the world on their own. But she did, and she made a fabulous business. And the, but with all, but she always use to say, ‘I went and married an engineer. I could have married anybody. Anybody in the business would have married me, and wanted to marry me. But I have to go and marry an engineer.’ So my father, he’s a good, very good little many, I don’t blame her for that. So she, she just married an engineer, and brought her children up just the way every or-, ordinary man would do it. If she married some of these people she would have been in business. Big business. But she fell in love with my father, and... SIGRIST:Well, let’s talk about that engineer. Your fa-... END OF SIDE ONE, TAPE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE SIGRIST:...father’s name was Robert Kirk? KIRK:My father’s name was Robert Walls, W-A-L-L-S, Jack. SIGRIST:And tell me a little bit about his family background. KIRK:His family came from a place called the Kilmarock. SIGRIST:Can you spell that, please? KIRK:K-I-L-M-A-R-O-C-K. SIGRIST:Thank you. KIRK:Kilmarock. And he, he had a bro-, he had a brother. He had two brothers. No, he had one brother. I don’t know about the other one. But anyhow, he, they, they came from there. And my, my, I don’t know how my mother met him. She must have met him somewhere, naturally. (she laughs) I don’t know where she met him, but anyhow they fell in love. And he went, they went together for a long while. He had, he used to go down to the ships because when the, see, the ships came in, she had her people there working on the ships. And when, when the job would be done he would go down and pick her up and all that. But he had his mind made up to marry her. And so she got married, but she always said, there’s no reason, he’s a lovely man and all that. But I could have been on the top of the, the, the hill with some of the men who wanted to marry her because she had a good business. But she fell in love with my hus-, my father. And he... SIGRIST:What was his personality like? KIRK:Oh, his person-, he wasn’t as gushy as she was. No, no. He was a very, he was a, he, when I knew him he was pullman in John Brown’s ship building yard, where they, where they made, they built the Queen Mary. And he was a foreman in the ship, in the engineering department. And he was a very good engineer. He did, and that’s, and he was brass finisher, and he made all that brass that’s over there. (she indicates) And he made the brass that was in my mother’s house. It was all brass. And that, so he, he, but... SIGRIST:When you were a little girl what do you remember doing with your father? How would you spend time together? KIRK:Oh, when I was very little I, I fell asleep every night in his arms. He, he thought that the sun and the moon and the stars shone on me. I was special. Absolutely. I had a brother. I had a brother. He was seven and a half years older than me. But I was special. I was born in Christmas morning, and I was special. And I, at night he used, I, I remember he used to sing me to sleep at night. He though that I was the best thing that ever was born since oatmeal. (she laughs) That’s a saying. No, I, he insisted on me, see, I, I was very good. I took up elocution. You know, I did a lot of concert work. And he was great. All I remember, what I remember most of my father was to get an education. Although he, he had never gone, he had gone on as a, a, a journeyman in the yards. In these days you had to work five years before you could say you were an engineer or a carpenter. Not like now. Mechanics. No, no such thing as a mechanic. You had to be a, a real thorough, you did it from the very beginning. So he, he became an engineer. And then he learned to be a, a brass finisher. And, but he was always, he worked in Brown’s. That was one of the, the biggest ship yards in Glasgow. SIGRIST:What, what were some of the things liked to do, like, his pastimes, the way he liked to spend time? Maybe recreational time? KIRK:Oh, well, when he was young he used to play pool. He used to play pool. What he did later on I, I really don’t know what he did. He, he met his friends, and they talked, and he never, he didn’t, he, the, people come up to the house, but they, I didn’t know what they did outside that. I mean, I don’t know what he did. But I know that he, when I went home with my children, he took my little girl up to the park every day. SIGRIST:Many years later. KIRK:Yeah, oh, he was much older, naturally. But he took them up, took her up to the park. What he did as a hobby, I really don’t know what his hobby, oh, no, I don’t think, I don’t know what his hobby had. No, no particular hobby. SIGRIST:You said you had one brother... KIRK:But he was always making things. Always making things. SIGRIST:You said you had a brother. KIRK:I had a brother. SIGRIST:What was his name? KIRK:And he, his name was James Richardson Jack. And he became, he went for, for, he studied shorthand. He became a teacher of shorthand. And he used to have people in the house at night, teaching them. They came for private lessons. And then he, but he also worked for the Glasgow Gas Company. He worked for the city, in the Glasgow Co-, in the office of the Glasgow, of the Glasgow city. The city, the city office. In the gas department of the city. And he had a very nice job there. And then he used to teach them, at night he used to teach them shorthand. He went to learn that. My father was all for education. Oh, and my mother was all for education, too. SIGRIST:Well, then tell, tell me about school when you were growing up. What was school like in Scotland... KIRK:Well, I went to school, I went to school at the, the age of four I think it was. And then I left at fourteen. I just went through grammar school. And the, we just, I was, well, I just went to school same as everybody else. (she laughs) SIGRIST:Why did you, why did you leave at fourteen? Was that... KIRK:That, if you, if you didn’t go on to college. There was no such thing as the colleges they have now. You had to, if you wanted you could go on to teacher’s college. Now, I was a very good pupil. I got high marks in every class. And when I, I left at fourteen, I was going into business. Going to go into business. Any kind of a business. So the teacher came to the house, and pleaded with my mother to let me, my mother said, ‘I’m delighted if she wants to go on for,’ she, ‘No, I don’t want to be a teacher. I want to be a doctor. I want to be a doctor.’ Mother says, ‘Oh, you can forget about that.’ Because there was no, no gratuities like what there is today. You had to pay for your children when they went to college, when they went to be anything like that. She said, ‘We’re nice, we’re nicely, nice, comfortable working class people. But we’re not in a position to let you go to be a doctor, to pay for that.’ So, I didn’t. And I wouldn’t be a teacher. I would-, the teacher, you didn’t have to go to night college. You had to go to the, the teaching college. It was a different name, a different name. But I didn’t want to be a teacher. I could have been a good teacher, but I didn’t think about it. I left, and I went from, at fourteen I went to Young’s Commercial College on Argyle Street. And I took shorthand, typing and bookkeeping. SIGRIST:And this is, World War One has broken out at this point. KIRK:Oh, this is World War One. SIGRIST:Right. World War One. KIRK:And I, ‘14. Yeah, the war broke out in 1914. SIGRIST:’14. And you would have... KIRK:Yeah, I was just leaving school. And I learned shorthand, typing and book-, I went to Young’s Commercial College. Then I got a job, I got, I got quite a few jobs. I got a job in a pawn broker’s shop first. I learned something there. Then I went and I took an exam. I have a whole thing written down I sent in to Short Hill. You had to tell, tell about where you came from and all like that. I could, I could give you, give you a copy of it. I went to, I, I got a job in, I took an exam in the Glasgow city chambers. I, I went in, I went and got city, a city exam, and I passed it, and I was in municipal buildings for a long while. SIGRIST:Was that common for young ladies to get jobs at... KIRK:Oh, at my age, at, at fourteen, the war was on. Oh, yes. People went in, in to different, went to be seamstresses. They went to, in to stores to work. Oh, no. Things were different from when my mother was, that was a, no, no. 1914 everybody began to blossom. SIGRIST:Can you tell me about World War One and how it effected your life, if it effected your life? KIRK:Oh. Well, I, I, when it started, the calling all the boys in the district up. And they’re all in their kilted, they’re drawing their own kilts, parading up and down the street. And the, what else do I want to say about that? And the, oh, during the war we were all rationed. I remember that. You could only, you could get, you couldn’t get much, because when, when the war broke out in 1914, there were no aeroplanes going around. The first aeroplane that I saw, I was in the country at the time, and everybody was out looking at it. ‘Oh, my, an aeroplane. Never seen it before in my life.’ So that, then, then that was when the aeroplanes came, but, but it was only, it was only for the military. No, no, no passenger aeroplanes. Oh, no. Just for the military. So we, but I worked, I worked in the recruiting office. I left the city and I worked in the recruiting office in South Saulkinghall [PH] Lane. I worked there for a couple of years. And then, of course, of course, we had all the boys from, the American boys, the Australian boys, Canadian boys. All Glasgow, you couldn’t walk on the streets in Glasgow in the city. And it was a great time for the girls. I had more boyfriends. Oh, God. More boyfriends during that time. I was only fourteen, but that didn’t make any difference. SIGRIST:What about your brother? Did he have to serve in the war? KIRK:My brother, my brother was a, a, in the beginning he was a conscientious objector. And he, he went to court. He had to go to court and tell his views. He had religious views. He didn’t believe in killing. And he said, I, I don’t, he didn’t believe in fighting. He was a footballer [sic]. He was, he was a, a, a, in the, in the first league. He was a footballer [sic] with the first league. Rangers and Celtics. Yeah. But he didn’t believe in fighting. He didn’t believe in killing. So he used to court. Every so often he went to court. And he didn’t have a lawyer. He conducted his own case. Then finally he had to go. They wouldn’t let, no, he wasn’t a conscientious objector. Conscientious objectors were put in prison. He just refused to go. When eh was called up he refused to go. So he always had to go to court. So finally he had to go. And they shipped him, he was lucky, they shipped him away up to Inverness. Right up to the norths [sic] of Scotland because he could take shorthand so rapidly that they needed somebody like that. So he didn’t have to fight. He was sent up to Inverness, and he was tak-, the officers took him in hand, and he went to all the court marshals. He went over to Ireland to court marshals, he went to England to court marshals. And he, rapid, rapid shorthand. And so he was a, well, he was a great, he was in great demand up in Inverness. So he never saw the war. He never saw the war zone. SIGRIST:He was lucky. KIRK:He was lucky. He was up in Inverness all the time the war was on. And he married an Inverness girl. Her, her father was a, a sergeant major. It was the Cameroon Highlanders. In Inverness the Cameroon Highlanders. And he, he, he, she, her husband was a, her father was a sergeant major in the Cameroons. And he died. So as a, as a daughter he, they gave her a job in the office. So she met my hus-, my brother, and eventually they got married. SIGRIST:Do you remember when the war ended? KIRK:The war ended in 1918. SIGRIST:Do, was there a celebration of some sort, or does anything stick out in your mind... KIRK:You mean the first, I... SIGRIST:The first world war. KIRK:No, I was the, I was the, oh, yes. Oh, all, celebration. Of course. Everybody went mad when the war finished. Oh, sure. 1918. That was right. Then it was after that that I, everybody, after that there was loads of work while the war was on. Ship yards were blooming. Soon as the war was finished everybody was getting laid off. There was depression in the country. And the, everybody wanted to come to America. Everybody was putting in to get to America, to go to Canada, anywhere. So that that was when everybody came to America. 1918 the men came over to America first. And then they brought their families over. You see. See, so that, it was, that’s why so many people came from Scotland, because of the depression. There was nothing, there was no work. So they were grasping for a job. But, and America sent out signals that everything was wonderful here. So they came to America. And that’s, that’s why they all came. SIGRIST:When you were growing up, maybe when you were a little younger, what did you know about America? KIRK:About what? SIGRIST:About America. What did you know... KIRK:I... SIGRIST:...about America when you were in school? KIRK:...never heard about America. I never there were, I don’t remember them talking, I never even heard about America. I never heard, we never discussed America. No, no, there were no... SIGRIST:So you had no relatives that were here? KIRK:I had, evidently I had later. I had an uncle who came to Rutherford, Jersey. And, not, not during that time. The previous war. Long before the war, first world war. They came over here when there, when there was the, now what, what war? It was the war before that. When there were... SIGRIST:Spanish-American War? KIRK:On of these wars. One of these... SIGRIST:The Boar War? That’s earlier. KIRK:And he came over here, and he lived in Rutherford, Jersey. But whenever there was talk about war, he came over here to work. He packed up and went home. They weren’t going to stay to fight anybody’s war. They packed up and went home. But, of course, they went on sailboats in these days. I came in a lovely ship. S.S. Transylvania. Oh, boy. Dancing every night. We had a wonderful time. In these days it was the, it was the sail ships. They had to bring their own cups and saucers and everything and lie on the deck. Anyway, there was no places for them to sleep. That, the, so he came over here to America. But whenever there an announcement of a war. The War of Independence. I think it was War of Independence. They just packed up and made tracks for, back to Scotland. So there was none of them wanted to fight. No fighters in my family. Evidently with the men, anyhow. SIGRIST:Well, why did you want to come to America? KIRK:Well, I had, I had no reason, because I had a nice home. I, I was in a, in an apartment house, but in a nice home. And my father was, we were nicely fixed. We went away, every year we went away on a vacation. And that’s what a lot of people in Scotland, in Glasgow, can’t say. I was (unintelligible), when his, you see, in the, two weeks in the summer the, the yards closed down. That’s what they called the, the two, the, the Clyde, the lab-, the Clyde, what do they call it? The labor fortnight. For two weeks. Fortnight. And that’s when you had your vacation. All the men in the ship yards were off vacation. Well, we always, my mother always planned to go away, because they had the money. They weren’t, they weren’t rich by any means, but they were well, they were comfortable. So we went over to Ireland one year. We went up to Inverness. We went up to, we went to all the places in Scotland for, for two weeks, I mean, a week. And my father, then they went down to the other places. And in the summer, in, they would leave me when, when the school came out. Of course, they had six weeks of, of, the schools was closed. They would leave me at a farm. We would go to, they would go to live in a farm. You know, pay for the, pay the rent. And they always left me for a, for another two weeks, so that I would get well and strong and healthy. And I stayed for the two weeks. Then they came and picked me up. So, but, but when, when we went to anywhere they had to, that they had to bring me back. We went to a whole lot of places and brought, and I was all over Scotland before I ever came to America. I would talk to people here, well, so and so, I, we used to just go down to Gourock. Well, that’s like going down to, down to, where you, down the water. Down the water. It was only just a run, a run on the train. People couldn’t afford anything more than that. Or they’d go to Rothesay. Or close by. It was just a, an hour’s journey to the... SIGRIST:Well, when you decided that you wanted to go to America, was there someone here sponsoring you? KIRK:No, no, no. SIGRIST:No. KIRK:I, I was, I just was like my mother. I was adventurous. And my, oh, my father. My, no, I said, ‘I’d like to see what, I would like to see what America is like.’ I would have gone to India. I would have gone anywhere. I was going to travel. So I said, ‘I would like to go and see,’ I had no thought of staying in America when I came. I said, ‘I’d like to see America. I’d like to, I’d like to see, if everybody’s going to America, I would like go to see America, too.’ And my mother, being a good business woman, she says, ‘I hate you to go,’ because I was the only one at home. My fa-, my brother was married and had his, his family. And the, but she said, ‘I wouldn’t stand in your way. I would never stand in the way of anybody’s desire to do anything.’ She says, ‘You’ve been very successful in business here. Your jobs have al-, you’ve always had good jobs. And if you would like to go to America,’ she says, ‘it will break my heart to see you leave, but I wouldn’t stand in your way.’ So I, I applied for my, you know, in that letter you see I waited two years to get a visa. SIGRIST:It took that long... KIRK:Oh, you couldn’t, and my mother was hoping I would never get a visa. SIGRIST:Why did it take so long? KIRK:There was, America was very fussy about who they let into the country. Oh, I couldn’t, even, I couldn’t, no woman could come into America in these days unless you had a sister claiming her, or a brother claiming. But he had to show that he was her brother. But it was mostly a sister or an aunt claiming you, because they were afraid of prostitution or whatever it would be. But no girl could come in here without somebody claiming her. And, so I, so I, I had, I had, I wanted to come. Oh, I, how I got, somebody claimed me. My father, being an engineer and a, a foreman in the yard, he had lots of apprentices. And one apprentice came to America. And he work-, he was working with the Lacawauna [PH] Railroad. He, he wrote home to my father to tell him how he got on in America. And he said, I got a good job with the Lacawauna Railroad. And I’m living with a, a family from England. We have a, a spare bedroom, and I was lucky to get that spare bedroom. Lovely British people, English people. And he said it’s a lovely family. I was very fortunate. So he, he’s writing all this in the letter. So I had nobody to come to. I would have nobody to claim me if I went, came. My mother, businesslike as she was, said, ‘There’s your chance to go to America. We’ll write to the lady that he’s staying with, and we’ll ask her, would she claim you.’ Oh, right on the spot. No waste of time. So she wrote, and, and said that I had desire to come, but I, I didn’t have any relatives in America. But it was just a desire to come, to travel, to come to America. But she understood that you had to have somebody claim you. Would she be willing to, she said the boy, this, this boy was living in the house. And she said he tell, he gives such a wonderful, your re-, reputation. You’ve got, and he said, he said you’re wonderful people. Would you be willing to to claim my daughter. And she wrote back and said, sure, she would claim me. So, I came to America. SIGRIST:How long did it, it took you two years to actually get the papers... KIRK:Two years after I put in my application. And then, of course, I, then I arranged to come. It was The Transylvania I came on. SIGRIST:Well, was that, do you remember what you packed when you took, when you finally left... KIRK:Oh, in these days you took everything in the hold. You had a big trunk. Everybody got a trunk. You brought your, all the clothes, and I brought, I brought a whole lot of that brass with me. And you brought a lot of that, brought blankets. My mother made me take blankets. Oh, I had, I had that trunk full. And it went down in the hold. Then you had a little suitcase that you took to you cabin, just to dress every day, and night clothes and stuff.. SIGRIST:Was there something that you took with you that you wanted as a momento of Scotland? An object, a bible, or something, some... KIRK:All that brass. All that brass. SIGRIST:Which, your, which had been your father’s? KIRK:I took that, I took that brass. He made all that. That’s what I took. My mother, my mother insisted that I take, take some of that with me, and, as a remembrance, you see. So I have it there. SIGRIST:What time of the year did you leave? KIRK:That was Novem-, November. SIGRIST:November you left? KIRK:November. No. It must have, November. I, I, I wasn’t, I wasn’t, twenty-three of December, till December came. Yeah, it was November. I think it was around November. It was the winter months. SIGRIST:Was there... KIRK:And we came by boat. SIGRIST:Right. Did, was there a good-bye party, or did your parents give you a little dinner or something... KIRK:No, no, there was none of that. My father nearly broke his heart. But he gave me two, three hundred dollars. He said, ‘You’re going to a strange country.’ I don’t know, it was pounds. ‘You’re going to a strange country, and I don’t want you to be without money.’ He said, ‘You’re breaking my heart because you’re going, because I don’t, there’s no reason for you to go. You’re well kept here. You’re, nice, you have a nice job. You have everything. You have no reason to go. But you want to travel.’ So he said, ‘But I wouldn’t make you go into a country without money.’ And then that’s why I travelled second class. A lot of people came over to America with assistance. This is how you were up there. They had assistant packages. The, they had to pay them back. When, once they got a job they had to pay them back. I had came second class. I had to pay nobody back. And he gave me the money to, to, so that I wouldn’t be stranded. And if I was stranded in any way, I was just to book up and come home again. You know what I mean? SIGRIST:Do you remember saying good-bye to your parents? KIRK:Eh? SIGRIST:Do you remember saying good-bye to... KIRK:Oh, I remember saying good-bye to my mother. I, she came, before, before I, it was time for me to go, I worked for the Glasgow, I got another job with the Glasgow railroad. Oh, you must be tired listening to me. The Glasgow railroad. The Glasgow something, I forget the name. And I worked up in the, right over where the people, you know, there was a, a barricade. And when the people were going to, on the boat, the, the people were kept outside the barricade. And I remember being upstairs. And I, I looked out. And I said, ‘Oh, my God, isn’t that pathetic.’ The mother’s would be crying, and the father’s would, ‘Oh.’ You know, all the tears all over the place. And I said, ‘Boy, oh, boy. If I ever get married, I hope I have girls. If I have any children, I hope I never have a boy.’ Boy, I got my wish. Got two girls. So, anyhow it used to be tearful watching them. So it was the same when I left. They couldn’t get past. My mother nearly died, and tears running down her face and all that. And my father didn’t come to the boat. And, oh, he wanted nothing to do with it. So, saw me off and all the rest of it. And I, of course, I was crying, too, but not to the extent that she was. So we got on the boat, and oh, that’s how they did it. SIGRIST:This is a good place, we’re going to pause, and Kevin’s going to put another tape into the machine. KIRK:Well, my God, why do you want all this, all this that I’m giving you. (she laughs) I’m entertaining you. SIGRIST:We’re going to pause now, and I’m here with Margaret Kirk. END OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE ONE, TAPE TWO SIGRIST:All right. We’re not beginning tape two with Margaret Kirk, who came from Scotland in 1923. Mrs. Kirk, we were just getting you on the ship. KIRK:Yes. SIGRIST:What was the name of the ship? KIRK:The name of the ship was Transylvania. SIGRIST:And can you describe the ship forme? KIRK:Well, it was a big ship. I can’t tell you the, the amounts, but it was a, one of the larger, it was a, one of the larger ships at that time, outside of the Queen Mary. You know, it was a large ship. And then it was the ships that were controlled by the Anchor Line. It was a, a line in Scotland. Anchor Line. And all their boats, these were the boats, the Anchor Line, The Transylvania, the, three or four of them. And they all brought people, that, they came back and forth. And so we went and we had a lovely cabin. Two people. SIGRIST:Who did you, with whom did you share the cabin? KIRK:I shared the cabin with an elderly lady that was going on to Chicago. I don’t remember her name or anything, because she kept her, she was quiet, and I wasn’t. I was young. And I was at all the dances on the boat. I went to everything that was anything, and I met quite a few people who were coming back, you know. And we had dances and we had parties, and I, at twenty-two I wasn’t shy by any means. I was a double. So anyhow, I don’t remember her name. No, she was, she was going, she was telling me about, ‘Oh, Chicago’s a terrible place. Good thing you’re not going to Chicago. Riots, you know, the mafia, and all that,’ whoever was there at that time. I said, ‘Well, I’m going to New York,’ so, but I just listen to you. So anyhow... SIGRIST:Where did they feed you on the boat? KIRK:Oh, the best, the food. You couldn’t, nothing you, nothing, I don’t know how you could, what you could suggest, the very best of everything. And if you wanted something different they would get it for you. Well, anyhow, I, what was I going to say again? SIGRIST:You were dancing on the boat. KIRK:So I went. And while I was there I met a girl who worked in New York at one time. And I said, she said, ‘What are you, what are you going to do when you come to America?’ ‘Well,’ I said, ‘I, I can do shorthand. I do all that. I could, I’ll get, I’ll get a nice good office job. She said, ‘You’ll be a damned fool if you get an office job. You’ll only get about forty dollars a week. Maybe thirty. And you’re going to stay with this Mrs. Evans? And you’re going to travel from, from New York to Brooklyn every day? And, and you’re going to pay Mrs. Evans to stay with her. But, and between your travelling back and forth, and you’re going to your house where there’s three girls that dress well. You’ll have to dress well, too.’ And she said, ‘You’ll have nothing left. By the end of the week you’ll be broke.’ She says, ‘You’re a fool. Don’t go to an office. I’ll give you the name of an agency that takes on people, especially Scottish people. Very, they’re millionaires. And I’ll give you an agency you go to, and you become a nurse-, a nursery governments, governess. Because you’ve all the qualifications.’ So, I said, ‘All right. Give me this. I’ve got it. And when I came, oh, when I came, so I took the address and kept it and all that. So when I got to New York, in the meantime, in the meantime, I had a, a boyfr-, he wasn’t my boyfriend, but he was in Seattle. And he, when he heard I was coming, he thought he would come down to New York and just take me away to, where was it, Seattle? Yeah, some or other of these places. And, that he, I would come, and he would take me out. And, so he, he got in touch with Mrs., Mrs. Evans. That my mother-in-law. She, her name was, her first name was Mrs. Evans. Then she became Mrs. Kirk. He got in touch with her from, from wherever it was. I think, I think it was Seattle. He came down, and he called, and he said he was going to take a room in New York, and could he come and visit then. She said, ‘Sure.’ She said, ‘Oh, I’m so glad, I am so glad you came, because I don’t even know what the girl looks like. She sent a photograph, but it’s disappeared in my house.’ So he went and had dinner with them. And he, the next day he met Mrs. Evans, and they both down to the dock. She had to claim me. So he couldn’t claim because he was only, just a friend. And, but I didn’t come to see him. No, no. I came to see America. So anyhow, but he was, really thought that he could get me to go back with him, because he was after me when I was home to get married. I wasn’t going to get married. Anyhow, she, she had to claim em. I don’t know how she had to claim me, but anyhow, she came, and I, I hugged her as my aunt, and all the rest of it. And I saw him. I was surprised. ‘How did you come from?’ So we all came back to, to, to Mrs. Evans’ house. She was a cook. Oh, she was a marvelous cook. She was a cook in one of the engineering places. And she had a wonderful dinner ready. And her sis-, daughters were home waiting for us. So he came, and we all sat down and had dinner and talked and one to the other. And she said, ‘Eddie, Eddie won’t be home until maybe around suppertime. So you haven’t met the whole of the family.’ I said, ‘Oh, yeah, I’d like to meet Eddie.’ So we were, and when it became time for Eddie to come in, we were all talking, and talking about different things. And when came time for Eddie to come in, she said, ‘Here’s Eddie.’ So she said, ‘Here, here Eddie. Here’s your cousin.’ I was supposed to be his cousin. ‘Here’s your cousin from Glasgow.’ So I put my hand out to say how do you do. And he grabbed me, and he took me in, and he kissed me furiously and hugged me. And his sisters were all looking. I, I got red in the face because I was just going to be polite. He says, ‘Cousins, oh, cousins don’t shake hands. Cousins kiss.’ Well, this fellow that came from Seattle, he saw this. And when he was leaving that night, he said, ‘If I, if you don’t come back with me now, I might as well say good-bye. I know that that fellow is not going to let you out of his sight until he marries you.’ And (unintelligible) that’s what happened. So anyhow, oh, no. Oh, I made him wait for years before he married me. No, sir. I didn’t... SIGRIST:Before we get to your marriage, let’s get you back on the boat, because we haven’t gotten you to America yet. KIRK:Well, I’m in the, I’m being, being, welcomed at the boat. And that’s all. That’s me finished with the boat. SIGRIST:How, how long was the, the ship? KIRK:Oh, I couldn’t tell you that. SIGRIST:How long did it take you to get to America is what I meant to say. KIRK:It took us two weeks. SIGRIST:Two weeks. KIRK:It took us two weeks, as I said, and that was stormy weather. Two weeks in the, to come to America. All these boats took two weeks sailing, and, yeah. SIGRIST:Then do you remember seeing the Statue of Liberty when you came in to New York? KIRK:I never even saw it to tell you the honest God’s truth. I was, they were all clamoring to see the Statue of Liberty. I was having so much fun with a crowd of fellows and girls, that I was in America before I even saw the Statue of Liberty. Now, I mean, that’s very disrespectful. But it was over, they had seen them, they had passed the Statue of Liberty. And I didn’t even realize it, because I was having fun with somebody. And it was after we were gone, I said, ‘Oh, I never even saw it.’ So we... SIGRIST:Being on the ship was a lot of fun for you? KIRK:I was having a good time to myself. I, I wasn’t coming over here because I was broke. I didn’t come here because I’d left, because I hadn’t a job in Scotland. I was coming over to have a good time. So anyhow... SIGRIST:Tell me what you remember about Ellis Island. KIRK:Well, I’m going to tell you the rest of the story, if you want to hear me, about, about what happened to me with my job. SIGRIST:I want you to tell me about Ellis Island first. KIRK:I came, we, the boat, the boat came along side of Ellis Island, the pier there. And the man, one of the officers came and said the people who were coming for the first time had to move from that ship over to Ellis Isle, over to, only across, it wasn’t any further than from that wall to that wall. (she indicates) Across the pier. And there was other people, a few people like myself were coming for the first time. So they came across. And when we went in it was empty. Positively empty. And they, they were told to sit, sit at, at, at a stair, sit on stools, on benches right inside the door. So we sat on benches. And in a couple of minutes a man came along, saw our passports, stamped them, ‘Good-bye,’ and we went across it, across, back to, back, we went right back to the ship. I tell you it was a, less than an hour from the time we shipped, docked, and by the time we were back again. SIGRIST:Short and sweet. KIRK:Oh, I never, I don’t know anything about Ellis Island. I don’t remember, that’s what I mean. You’re wasting your time coming to me. (she laughs) But anyhow you can, you can put this in some stupid place. Anyhow, then, so Mrs. Evans. Do you want to hear the rest of it? SIGRIST:Yes, yes. KIRK:So, I said to Mrs. Evans, ‘You know, this girl on the boat, she was going on to Chicago or somewhere else. She used to work in New York, and she said I would be very foolish to go to an office. She gave me this address. She said, I said, so make, she said you’ll get good pay there, and well, and best of food and everything. The millionaires.’ So I said, so Mrs. Evans said, ‘Well, I’ll take a day off.’ She took a day off to get me. And she says, ‘I’ll take another day off, and I’ll go over with you to the agency.’ So this, so over we went. Well, don’t, don’t think it was the next, this fellow came. He took me for a week to different restaurants, and we had a week getting around. And he thought maybe he could persuade me. Well, anyhow, she, she came to the, to the agency on Park Avenue. Was it Park Avenue? Madison Avenue. And the, this lady came in, and I told them that I had, I have them my credentials of what I had done and so forth. So this lady came in, a Mrs. Hoagland. H-O-A-G-L-A-N-D. Hoagland. And they were millionaire real estate people. (unintelligible) So anyhow, I explained to her what I did, and she saw me and all that, and she said, ‘Well, I have two girls. Two chil-, two school girls. I want a governess, a nursery governess for them. And I have, everybody in my building, in my, that works for me is Scottish, except the cook. She’s Irish.’ There was five, five servants in the house. And it was over in East 66th Street, New York. One of these buildings that go way up, and every one of the, anyhow to get away from that, that’s, I’m telling you that story. She evidently like me. And she signed me up. So my mother, my mother-in-law said, it was, I was getting a hundred and fifty dollars a month, all found. Now, that was, I didn’t have to use a penny of that hundred and fifty dollars. I got my food, my room, and every, went everywhere with, I was all over. I went to all the best places in New York with them. So anyhow, she, what was I saying again? So, my mother-in-law said, ‘Well, you know, I’m Margaret’s aunt.’ My mother-in-law was a tall lady. She wore hats like Queen, Queen Mary, and she was very distinguished looking. And she said, I am Margaret’s aunt, and I want to go with her to see where she’s going to be living.’ So Mrs. Evans came with me, and we went to the house on 66th Street. And there was an elevator running from the bottom right up to the top of the house, in the private house. So she said, ‘Because I want to let you know that if Margaret doesn’t like it, or has any trouble, she has always me in America to come to.’ She let it be known that I wasn’t on my own. So there’s where it was. I got the job and and stayed with them for a couple of years. The girls went to this Chapin School. The very best school. SIGRIST:Did you miss Scotland when you were here? KIRK:Well, of course, I, I, I would, I wrote letters every week to my parents, to my mother. Oh, yes. And she wrote them back to me. I kept up with that. And, well, I, I didn’t, no, I, I, I’m not a homesick person. SIGRIST:You were having fun. You went for the adventure and you were happy and... KIRK:And I went everywhere. And these people were wealthy. And if I took the children out to a restaurant, all I did was sign the check, sign the, the check. And I didn’t have any, took them everywhere. I went to all the dancing classes with them. They went, in the, it was in the Macaulpin [PH] at that time. And they had a special, a special day for their, for the well to do children, all gathered on the same day for any dancing lessons. They went to the skating rink. The skating rink was, nobody was allowed into the skating rink except the well to do people on that day. And all the nurses came with them. And they served coffee and cake. And they, we sat up in the balcony. And there they learned to skate. Oh, yeah. Nobody, no outsiders were in. So I went all over. I went everywhere... SIGRIST:So you felt very privileged? KIRK:I, and I went to, I’m glad that that girl gave me the address. And I went to, went to Seabright in the summer. They had a big house in Seabright. And we went, and I went in, I went, took them to the swimming. And I was a good swimmer. And I used to go in and swim with them. And all that. And then I got a little tired of it. So I said, ‘Ach, I’m tired of them.’ They were getting pretty fresh. You know... SIGRIST:How long did you do it? KIRK:I stayed for about a couple of years. But at that time, you know, I was able to stand on my head. I was could do all kinds of athletics. SIGRIST:And you weren’t married at that point, right? KIRK:Oh, no. I was free as a bird. So I left, I got tired of them. They got, they got pretty fresh as the time went on. So I got tired of them. And I left, and I went to another, I went to live with, to get a job with Mrs. Sheldon. I got a very good reference from Mrs. Hoagland, and I went to live with Mrs. Sheldon. She had one daugh-, one child in school, and a boy in college. They lived in an apartment house, and I had my own, I lived in the same room as the children. I stayed with them for about, I stayed with her maybe a, another year. And in the meantime Edward was always wanting to get married. I said, ‘No, no. I didn’t come over here to get married.’ But he took me to all the shows, theatres and everything. And then finally I said, ‘All right. I’ll get married. I’ll get married.’ SIGRIST:What was Edward’s full name? What was his full name? KIRK:Edward Hamilton Kirk. Edward... SIGRIST:Edward Hamilton Kirk. KIRK:...Hamilton Kirk. SIGRIST:And when did you marry him? KIRK:I, when did I marry him? In ‘27. The 22nd of, of ‘27. SIGRIST:Was he, was he Scottish also? KIRK:He’s, his mother orig-, his mother and father all originally come from Ireland. But Kirk is a Scottish and an Irish name. And she came from Tipperary. And, so that there’s, there was an influx of Scottish and Irish, you know. And, so that’s, so I got married to Eddie, and gave up, and we started to, we stayed in his mother’s house at first, because we just made up our mind like that we’re going to get married. And off we went and got married. No fanfare or anything. Nothing at all. SIGRIST:Have you ever been back to Scotland? KIRK:Oh, yes. SIGRIST:When was the first time you went back to Scotland? KIRK:I went back when my first little, this little girl that I had when I got married, first was, she was ten months. SIGRIST:What was her name? KIRK:Her name was Margaret. And I went back on one of the Anchor Line boats. I don’t know whether it was The Transylvania or The Transylvania or the, I don’t remember the name of the ship now. I could look... SIGRIST:What did, how did you feel when you went back to Scotland? What did it feel like to be back in Scotland for the first time? KIRK:Well, I hadn’t been over, that was, I had been, three years, four years I was, before, about four or five, between four and five years. And, of course, my father, the boat I came in, came into Glasgow. All these Anchor Line boats came into Glasgow. See, most of the people today have to go up to Liverpool, or to go to different places to board the boat. But we, the boats came right, came into Glasgow. So my father was waiting for me. And, no, my mother stayed home. She said she couldn’t stand to come to the boat. My father was there, and he was delighted to see me, and the baby, oh, crazy about the baby. And I had a great big English carr-, carriage for her. My mother-in-law liked to be swanky. We lived in a brownstone house. And she had to get an English carriage. I didn’t want an English carriage, but I had the English carriage on the boat. I had it on the boat. I used to take her on deck, on the, on the boat. And the, so all that had to be taken off the hold, out of the hold, every, my, my trunk and everything. And then we got car cab took us home, and my mother had a nice dinner. And there I stayed, I was, I didn’t want to come back to America. Now I had a good husband. Don’t make me wrong. I said, ‘Oh, the hell, I just as well, I’ll stay home.’ I was there six months. I went, I got a, I could only go for three months. You, you’re not, I put in, oh, another thing is, I married an American subject. And I was, wasn’t an American subject. So when I went to get my passport refilled, they took and tore my passport in two. They said, ‘You, you’re a woman without a country.’ ‘I’m a woman without a country?’ ‘You married an American. You married an, and you haven’t been, you didn’t get your papers yet or anything like that.’ So I don’t know what I was going to do. Said, ‘Oh, you, you have a lot of,’ so my husband, he was maitre d’ of the Hotel St. George for years, and he knew all the big judges. He says, ‘We’ll clear that up. That won’t take long.’ So he went down with me to the municipal buildings, and we met Judge Moskovitch [PH]. And he only went in and saw him two minutes, I had my, I had my letter to go to Scotland. So I, I went as a woman without a country, but I had the judge’s thing. So when I had to report to the police station in my district every month to show that I was still in the country. So, of course, I knew almost every, every one of the boys in the police station. But it, because it was, I was in the city. I wasn’t in the country. I was in the city. But I was in a district of, of, of Glasgow. So I, but I said, ‘Ah.’ I was having a good time in Scotland, too, and I was going here and there and all the rest of it. And my mother was dying to keep the baby. I went to Isle of Mann, I went everywhere. And I signed for another three months. Of course, my husband was here. He, he went to stay with his mother. She lived in Greenwich Village. And he went to stay there while I was away. But he, he, he didn’t care for it. So he got a job in the country during the summer. And eh, when, when I came, so he, he was getting well taken care of. I, I, people would say, ‘Your husband’s all alone.’ I say, ‘Oh, the hell with him. He can have a good time with all the girls he wants to while I’m away. I don’t care. (unintelligible) have a good time. As long as he doesn’t come home to me with a dose of venereal disease, I don’t care where he goes.’ So that’s the kind of girl I was. (she laughs) SIGRIST:So you finally came back, though, after six months... KIRK:So after six months, and he came to the dock, and met me. And we went back to the, at that time, see, I left his mo-, I was still living in his mother’s house. We hadn’t gone, oh, we had an apartment, but we gave it up. So we went back to her. And he had got me another apartment. So when I came to his mother’s, we stayed overnight there, then I, he showed me where the apartment was. So I got another, in the, in the Brooklyn Gardens, down at 23rd Street. We, he had to, he had to buy, he had to buy the, the, the floor. So that’s when I went from there onwards... SIGRIST:Let me, let me ask you a final question. Do you consider yourself more Scottish or more American? KIRK:Oh, I’m more Scottish. I’ll never be anything else but Scottish. If I live, I’ve been here sixty-, well, how many? Sixty-eight years. SIGRIST:Seventy-one. Seventy-one years. KIRK:Seventy-one years. No, I’ll always be Scottish. I’ll, I’ll do everything all proper here in America. But I, I, at, at heart I’ll always be Scottish. SIGRIST:Mrs. Kirk, I want to thank you very much for letting us come up here and... KIRK:(she laughs) You put that on for somebody down at the place, they’ll laugh like hell. SIGRIST:They, no, they’ll enjoy listening to this. (she laughs) This is Paul Sigrist signing off with Margaret Kirk on February 25th, 1994 in Brooklyn. Thank you. KIRK:All right. (she laughs)