NASH: Today is October 16, 1973. I am visiting with Commander Sigmund Kirschen who is an associate professor of economics at the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy in Kings Point, Long Island. Commander Kirschen specializes in the economics of shipping and international trade. Commander Kirschen is also a person who came from, who was born in Poland and came to the United States at the age of sixteen, and he is going to tell us the story of his immigration and of his career in the United States. And I will begin by letting Commander Kirschen tell his own story. KIRSCHEN: All right, I was born August 1, 1910 in a small town in Poland. The name of the town is Pudzinw. We then went to Tarnapol, which is where my parents resided, and lived there until my fourth birthday, August 1, 1916, when the town became involved in World War One and in the middle of the night we fled to Vienna as refugees. I remember only the noise and the fact that I was aroused in the middle of the night and bundled up and taken by train to Vienna. We lived in Vienna as refugees until 1927, that is my mother, my brother, and I were there until 1927. My father, who went into the Austrian army in 1916 was mustered out in 1918, 1919 rather. In 1921 he immigrated to the United States at the insistence of my mother, although he wanted to go back to Poland where he had been a merchant. My mother refused to go back to Poland and insisted that we immigrate to the United States. He came here and worked as a clerk and counterman in a restaurant until 1927 when he became a citizen and was able to bring the family over. Now we came on a French ship, the name of which escapes me at the moment. We were immigrants, passengers of the ship with a large number of other American, that is immigrants to the United States. I remember staying in Ellis Island overnight, being processed. NASH: May I go back for a moment? On what class did you travel? KIRSCHEN: Third class. NASH: And what was third class like? KIRSCHEN: Well, it wasn't too bad. It was my first experience outside of Poland and Austria, and we had I think a day in Paris and a day in Le Havre. I remember learning my first few words of English on the ship and I had gone to a gymnasium in Vienna and had finished I think my first five classes of gymnasium. I had never studied any English. The opportunity just wasn't there. So when we arrived in the United States I was not really prepared linguistically to the challenge which I met. Now my dad had provided us, or rented a cold-water flat on Delancy and Ludlow Streets in New York and had furnished it with the assistance of relatives who were instrumental in bringing him to the United States initially. NASH: Let's go back to Ellis Island for a moment. Do you remember what the processing was or what the place looked like? KIRSCHEN: I remember only one thing. Not the surroundings, but my brother who was at the time six was undernourished and I remember that we were held back because he was put through a second physical examination to make sure that he was, physically, he was meeting minimum standards of health at the time. But ultimately we all made it. I really have no recollection about the process. We were really bewildered by the process itself and, of course, we were in company of a lot of other people who were similar position. NASH: Do you have any visual impressions? KIRSCHEN: Visual impression I first had was coming over on the ferry and then going in a taxi cab from South Ferry to the Lower East Side where our apartment was, and I remember that the taxi cab went only under the elevated structure of the then First or Second Avenue elevated, and although it was early in the morning, I remember seeing no daylight out of this taxi cab until (he laughs) we arrived on Delancy Street, which was about two blocks away from the elevated structure, which has been taken down since then. We met some family here. I met no relatives who were anywhere near my age group. I was sixteen when I came here. I got a job as a stock clerk in a stationary store, wholesale stationary store, about a week after I arrived here and then went to a private school called the Eron, E-R-O-N, School, which is now I believe on Union Square. At that time it was on East Broadway in a building right near the Forward Building, for English instruction at night. That was until September when I was able to enter public school. NASH: How were you able to find your first job? KIRSCHEN: That was with a relative. In September I registered in the East Side Evening High School and graduated after three years. NASH: Did you attend at night? KIRSCHEN: I attended only at night. I worked during the day. I had a six-day job, and I did rather well on the job because three years later, by 1929, 1930, I was earning then I think twenty-five dollars a week, which was pretty good. NASH: Do you remember the Depression? I mean the stock market crash, did it have any effect on your employment? KIRSCHEN: Yes, I do. I remember that because one of the jobs I held in 1929 was going out to see customers of the stationary and toy wholesale house for which I worked and taking orders and collecting bills. And I remember my boss's observation when I came back right immediately after the Bank of the United States had closed. He said, "I never knew they had so much money in those banks." (he laughs) But everybody, of course, used it as an excuse. Now after graduation from evening high school I was admitted to the City College on Twenty-third Street as an evening session student. Now, by then I was twenty years old and I still had language problems because although I had graduated from evening high school, no attention was paid to my accent, to my foreignism. My English was good, I could write well, and I understood everything, and I read, but my accent was very bad. Now I completed the first semester of evening at City College, at which point I decided that if I couldn't go to day school I'd be an old man by the time I graduated. So my dad at that time had purchased a small commission bakery on the West Side, on Orchard and Rivington Streets. NASH: What is a small commission? KIRSCHEN: A commission bakery is simply a store that buys bread from the bakers and sells it without really producing any of it, and this was a seven-day business open from about six in the morning until midnight. I applied for admission to the day session of the City College and I was admitted there in February of, I think, '31. And I worked with my dad the evening session. I would come in at four in the afternoon and work until midnight while I went to school during the day. I had language problems at City College, primarily because I was taking Latin, for instance, as a freshman. Now I'd Latin in Vienna, but in order for me to study Latin here, I had to translate Latin into German and then from German into English and this was kind of cumbersome. But my most satisfying experience at City College was being called to the Speech Clinic there and being given all the exercise and direction and assistance I needed to more or less lose whatever foreign accent I had, and it was very thick at the time. NASH: When you say you were called to the Speech Clinic... KIRSCHEN: Well, one of the first courses I was given was, a course in public speaking, and the instructor immediately referred me to the Speech Clinic which had a great success as well as good experience in correction of foreign accents, and I remember being given directions on how to practice my "th" sounds and my "s" sounds in front of a mirror, and finally getting rid of a good part of that accent simply by intensive practice and drill. NASH: Was the progression of your family's living quarters? Were you still in the Lower East Side at that time? KIRSCHEN: Yes, yes. We moved from the cold water flat to a modern apartment. Modern, by that I mean we had two bedrooms. It had been a renovated old tenement. We had steam heat, and this was really a nice modern apartment, which was in the same building where my folks' business was so that no time was lost. There wasn't any available for that anyway in going to and from work. I graduated from City in 1935 and took, in order to manage the City College program, I majored in German, which was my mother tongue, primarily so that I could learn English better, and my minor at that time was economics. My ambition was to become a teacher, all my life, ever since I remember, and I took the last license examination for high school teacher of German in the New York City School System that was offered to people without teaching experience. After that you had to get a Teacher-in-Training License and needed at least one year's experience in the high school system to qualify for a high school license examination, for admission. Well, I took that examination. I remember we had something like four hundred and twenty candidates. We were reduced to about forty by the time we came to the orals and I remember spending about an hour with Dr. Lacy, who was then on the Board of Examiners of the City of New York, who gave me an oral English examination. And after that hour and a half session, normally these examinations were five to ten minutes each, she wrote a report in which she failed me, but she said I had done very well for the time I was here, which was very little satisfaction to me. I then went on to get my Master's Degree in education and was looking for a job in the business world which was very difficult to get at the time. I was twenty-five, twenty-six, and a recent college graduate, and there wasn't really very much opportunity for me to get started. I remember going back to school at once, taking courses in economics, retailing, merchandising, and I also got a scholarship to the Rochdale Institute of Cooperative Training, which was run by the Cooperative League of America. This was a course I was able to complete during the day and which was really training people with some kind of experience in retailing for the management and operation of Cooperative stores. I wound up working for the Consumer-Farmer Milk Cooperative in Long Island City, which was a cooperative of dairy farmers in New York State who had their own distribution system in New York. I believe it is still in existence although it hasn't really been able to effectively compete with the large milk companies. I had difficulty getting into industry because of my age. I continued working with my parents in the store as a means of making a livelihood and going to school and taking all the courses I could in my minor which was business and economics. 1941 I got a job as, first, let me go back. I failed my first physical for the draft and I got a job as a German censor in the U.S. Office of Censorship. Within three months I was training other censors and a supervisor in the German Language Section. 1944 I was drafted into the Air Force and became a German instructor in the Army specialized Training Program in Fresno, California. I spent about two years in the army teaching German to younger GIs and ultimately was discharged in '46. NASH: For what purpose were they learning German? KIRSCHEN: Well, we were training people to go over as the members of the Army of Occupation, and the need for good German speaking personnel was great. We were a group of ten native-speaking Germans, mostly teachers and professionals, who were over thirty and therefore were not being considered to be sent overseas at the time, but we were training younger men who ultimately wound up in far too many cases simply as guards of German prisoners of war abroad rather than using their skill as German linguists for which they had been trained here. My last six months in the army were used rather well. That is, my skills were. A group of us German linguists were brought down to an army camp near Baltimore where all the German records of American prisoners of war had been shipped, and we traced a number of American missing GIs through the German records. As a matter of fact, we supervised some German prisoners of war here who knew English well and who were actually engaged in translating all these records and putting them in order, and we as German linguists supervised and checked their work to make sure that it was done properly. NASH: Did you ever have any connection with the Germans detained at Ellis Island? KIRSCHEN: No, no, I am not aware that there were any detained there. I don't know where else I can go. '46 I got out of service. As matter of fact, six months after I had been discharged I was offered a job in the Civilian Army of Occupation in Germany, which I declined. I had been married while in service here and I was anxious to get back to civilian life in the States. I was offered a job at the time teaching economics and business at the United States Merchant Marine Academy and I went back into uniform, so to speak, June 17, 1946. That was about four months after I had been discharged from service, and have been on the faculty here ever since. NASH: In what ways do you think the fact that you came from another country have, well, affect you today in your career? KIRSCHEN: I think it has broadened my horizon, added to my versatility. I think my experience makes it easier for me to try to teach people about the world as it is because this is really what the function of a teacher is, to help the student understand the specific subjects that he is teaching and the relationship of those subjects to life. NASH: Are your students aware of the fact that you were born in another country, do you think? Certainly you have no accent. KIRSCHEN: I have no occasion to tell them that, no, but I don't hide it, and all of my colleagues and people in the administration are aware of it. I think it helps rather than hinders because you do get credit for having overcome certain problems, linguistic ones, of which I am very proud. As a matter of fact, I taught a course in English for the foreign born in the Hicksville Public School System for about four years and I am sure I can say that I was more than successful in that because I was able to help them overcome the problems which I myself had, and by showing them that not only do you speak the foreign language which was your mother tongue, but you can learn to speak the new language without some heavy traces of accent is, I think, an accomplishment. And it helped my effectiveness as a teacher in that way. I was never trained to teach English to the foreign born, but what I learned at the speech clinic at City College is something which I hope adequately repaid to the people in the adult education program at Hicksville over a period of four years. NASH: It was a pleasure speaking with you. Thank you very much. KIRSCHEN: Thank you.