DANE: This is Debbie Dane, and I'm speaking with Mrs. Lois Lake on Monday, June 2nd, 1986. We're beginning the interview at 1:20 PM. We're about to interview Mrs. Lake about her immigration experience from then Asia Minor in 1912. She was ten years old. Okay. Mrs. Lake, we'll start at the beginning. If you would tell me where you were born and when you were born. LAKE: I was born in Smyrna, which is now Izmir, Asia Minor, in June 13, 1902. DANE: So you have a birthday coming up. And your parents, though, were not Turkish, were they? LAKE: No. They were Greek subjects in Turkey. DANE: How did it come that they were in-- LAKE: Well, my mother was an Athenian who had gone to Smyrna at some time. I don't remember when. And had, uh, met my father, who was from Thyatyra, one of the seven churches. And they met in, I imagine, from what I can remember their telling me, in church, because they were both believers in the Christian church. And they were, there was an American mission church there. And where they were, they were joined in marriage in 1900, I believe. DANE: Your mother was a teacher. LAKE: My mother had been educated, had been orphaned at ten, and her brother was kind enough, very kind to both her mother, his mother, and my mother, his sister. And, uh, had sent her to be educated in the American School for Girls in Constantinople, Istanbul, now. And, uh, graduated, she graduated in 1896, I believe. At which time she, I must have moved to Smyrna at some point with her mother because mother was living when we went to, we took her to Alexandria with us when we went to Alexandria. The year escapes me. Shortly, my father had gone to Alexandria. Conditions in Smyrna were very bad. DANE: Was he Greek also? LAKE: He was also a Greek. And he, uh, he had, he was in business with his brothers, building, making furniture. From what I can remember her mothers telling us this story, that they would make furniture for little palaces, the Turk's little palaces, and they'd tell them to go and, uh, get their money and they, or we would be in prison. And that was the, that was the story, as the story went. (She laughs.) DANE: I don't think I understand. LAKE: I remember very well I used to go, they used to take me as a little girl to the waterfront where there were cafes. And they'd tell me, "Don't talk, don't talk. Don't talk in Greek." You know how children will, of course, it would be in the evening and they would, it wasn't allowed. DANE: Because the Greeks were looked down upon they just didn't want to-- LAKE: No, no. Of course not. You know what happened later on. Later on they were, we managed to escape. Well, my father went for a year, went to Alexandria, Egypt, for one year where I had one brother who was born there and unfortunately my grandmother died and, uh, then was forced to go back to Smyrna because of my sister's health. They told him that, she had respiratory trouble. And the doctors told my father that, uh, if he wanted that child to live, that he'd better go back to better climate. So he was forced, in a way, to give up everything and-- Because he had found a very good job in, uh, in Alexandria, in spite of the fact, of course, at that time, it was under English control. And he was there, as things, I can remember many things there. We lived in a big house where I had to do quite a bit of little work. I had to go for milk and things and they'd send me for dates and sometimes they's fool me. The milk people would fool me and my father would take the whole bag and take it back again. (They laugh.) I remember those things so well. I don't know why they were so vividly impressed in my mind. DANE: So you had to pack up and go back to Smyrna. LAKE: We went back. Of course, it was very fortunate that somehow or other my mother had a, a niece who was only six months older, younger-- Because her mother was married, her mother, my mother's sister, was married very young. And she had a very large family and that made up for that. (She laughs.) DANE: That's amazing. LAKE: So they had been in this country, In Philadelphia, and had been established. Her husband was a shoemaker and, uh, they were, uh, instrumental in bringing us. DANE: How long were you back in Smyrna before-- LAKE: I don't remember. I don't remember exactly. I'd have to look it up-- I don't remember what year, how many years I had difference with my brother. I never could remember exactly how much younger-- (She laughs.) I should have-- I meant to look it up in the Bible, but-- DANE: What wa it, then? Was it the tensions that made your father-- LAKE: Yeah. Mainly the political situation and everything. People were destroyed. Smyrna was destroyed eventually. They lost, I lost many relatives. Some escaped. A few escaped a few years later, but it was a dreadful condition, terrible. You couldn't make a living. One couldn't make a living that way. DANE: Can you describe when you first learned that you were going to going, leaving? LAKE: Well, I know, I had a very lovely Scotch teacher. I had started, you start school at three. Europeans get an education, my dear. They don't, you're not, you weren't considered educated in Europe unless you knew at least three languages. My mother could speak English flawlessly. English, I mean, English. I don't mean any kind of nonsense that is spoken here. (She laughs.) And she also knew ancient and, and, uh, modern Greek and French. She could teach all three when she came to this country. She had people from the State Department who were her students. They were supposed to be translators and could not read the things that were put before them and so they came, discovered my mother in some way, I don't remember exactly. But she had, I know she had at least three students from the State Department at that time. A man, a woman who gave me something for my wedding, a wedding gift, and someone else. Three people whom she helped out. So that she, she really knew her languages. DANE: And you were in school by the time you were three? LAKE: Well, I, yes. And so then I had a head start. I had my education. I was ten then, I must have been ten, when we came. Because I was put in the fourth grade in Philadelphia, fourth grade. I had enough, they considered that I had enough schooling to be put in the Philadelphia school, in North Philadelphia, we went to, first we went to my aunt's home. Well- DANE: Let's not jump ahead. So when was it, did your father come home one day and say, "We're going." LAKE: Well, they, they, no, well, they had to sell their house. They had to sell their house, and they had to make preparations, they had to make, they had to get the, uh, necessary papers, or whatever they were to, uh, get them started. And they had to correspond, correspondence, of course, and, uh-- DANE: And were you aware that there were these plans that you were going to be leaving? LAKE: Going, surely. DANE: Did you have any image of what America was like? Had you ever heard about it? LAKE: No., I didn't. I didn't. This Miss cairns was my English teacher there. I had, I had, had a head start, but you just have to start, things like that. In fact, I still have the books that I started. It was called a C-Y-R system. It was a little brown, brown book. It's a little brown book. Not brown. Light brown. Light brown book, tan book rather.And, uh, we learned English. But, you know, it was very limited, my vocabulary was very limited. I mean, I wasn't, I knew enough, but I had to make that transition. And math, ooh, dear. In thinking-- In fact, I entered the school system and I had a great deal of difficulty. I was still thinking of Greek math. I'd be adding in Greek after I entered the school system. I finally-- DANE: Made the switch. LAKE: Made the transition. And, uh, now I can talk it. The others escape me. DANE: Were you excited about the idea of leaving and coming to-- LAKE: Well, I suppose so. I must have been, I must have been, we were all agog as children. There were three of us. There were three of us. And my mother, I think was almost expecting another one. (She laughs.) DANE: Do you remember when you were packing up to leave? LAKE: Yes. And I still have the, um, I wanted to take some little things, I have a few little things here downstairs, a few little things that I had in the kitchen. Teeny things that I had from Smyrna. DANE: What are they? Could you describe them? LAKE: Little things. A little, a little basket that was given me, a little woven affair, and a little, um, uh, cup and saucer, a little cup and saucer from a doll set and a few other things. I think I had a doll, but it broke. And, uh, some other few things. Mother said we couldn't, I couldn't take many things because our facilities-- One of the boxes which was, in which our belongings came, it's downstairs in the basement. It's an old large box about this big, that father made. And he painted it, at that time, stained it, rather. And it contained even a plate. My son has done some things of-- A plate, one of which is still in my possession in my china closet. Mother was mistaken in bringing plates. She was misled by-- Well, anyhow she had this set of plates that she brought and a few other things. And clothing. She had some clothing made for us which was ridiculed in this country. It was all, it was European styles at that time. At that time we also wore button shoes, low shoes, and they were ridiculed. Oh, the kids at school used to ridicule us because our schools were, our shoes were funny. DANE: How else were your clothes different from here? LAKE: I don't know. They were just different, a little different from the clothing here. And you know how some children are. People are cruel. Adults are cruel to each other. (She laughs.) And, at that time people hadn't opened their eyes. They thought Europe was a, an uncivilized-- (She laughs.) Absolutely. Absolutely. I know that. I speak from experience. My mother was, happened to get into a group of ladies through an organization, WCTU. The non-drinking people. And, uh, she was asked by somebody, one of the ladies, the president, Mrs. Cobertson, who was in Washington, to speak at the old Washington original library at 7th and K Streets where she spoke on many subjects. I don't remember. I don't remember. Of course, I wasn't present and I don't know what-- Which, I remember her telling us for years that, and telling me, that people asked her why she was, uh, whether they had water and baths in Greece. (She laughs.) Of course, there was poverty. There was poverty, just as there is in any country where there isn't any money. But the baths were discovered by the Greeks. (She laughs.) DANE: Do you remember what else your mother brought with you? LAKE: Yes, some woven, hand woven little towels and things like that which she gave away to people who, to whom she became close in this country. She gave each of us one or two as we grew up for our hope chests. She had quite a few of those. She brought things like that. As many as she could afford, because their means were very limited. They had sold their home and, uh, which wasn't anything, anything palatial, but just a modest home that father was able to build for himself. He was a carpenter and a wonderful, uh, cabinet maker. I have a desk downstairs, a secretary, which is beautiful. I had it finished after he gave it to me. DANE: And when it was time to leave, do you remember the day that you left and went down to the-- LAKE: Well, yes. We came over on the, I can't remember that part of it as much as I-- We came over on the Martha Washington, which was an American ship, and we had a terrible storm on-- Mother must have been sick. And my father-- At first they put us in steerage. Father couldn't take it. Couldn't take it. The first night was terrible. I remember that distinctly. Bundled up with a lot of other people. Ooh, it was horrid. And we couldn't sleep. So that-- The food was dreadful. So father did his best, I don't know what, he managed to get us into the inside, somehow or other. But I happened to be put in a big, what they called saloon. Well, that word didn't mean, on the ship, I was given to understand, the word didn't mean that it was a saloon. It was a big, beautiful room in the ship. Because I remember after the storm the captain asking me how I liked being in there. I was going back and forth from one part of the room to the other. (She laughs.) Oh, because my mother and, uh, the other children must have been put together in a cabin or somewhere. And I was taken to this other place. DANE: Can you describe in any more detail what steerage was like? LAKE: And then, on Ellis Island, I remember Ellis Island as a big place with some kind of benches and compartments. And somehow or other we were detained overnight. There was some irregularity in the papers. But fortunately an uncle of mine, a nephew of, he was not an uncle, really. We called him Uncle Charlie because he was so much older, but he was really my cousin, our cousin, my cousin, was able to come and straighten it out for them. They must have phoned. Because we were detained and this, there was a tall gentleman who I always remembered at Ellis Island who gave me my first little American pie, apple pie. It was unknown to me. You know, apple pies are not a known dessert in Turkey. Many of their famous desserts, they have many famous desserts, not pies, which I remember distinctly. DANE: Did you like it? LAKE: Oh, yes. (She laughs.) Yes, I did. When we went to Philadelphia I used to ask mother for apple pies. DANE: That's wonderful. What else do you remember, um, when you first saw Ellis Island, it's rather a large place. LAKE: Large, it was a large building, as I recall it. A very large, sort of barn-like building, in my information. To me it was, having seen, I don't remember whether I actually saw the statue in my opinion. I don't know whether we got there in time, daylight, or they pointed it out to me. I know that each time that I've been, in my lifetime, and many times, I've shed many a tear. I get very emotional when I pass the place. DANE: I know it's-- LAKE: All those memories that come back to me. I took a trip there once in, oh, I don't know when, shortly before my husband passed away, in the late sixties. And we took that Ellis Island trip. The only trouble was that it was a foggy day and we missed the best part. However, I sat there and cried like a baby. I don't know, it brought back so much to me, you know. I get emotional. DANE: Yeah, sure. How would you describe, I know it's hard, but what does it mean to you, then. The Statue has such-- LAKE: It meant a great deal to me. Because it came from, we came from, from that terrible servitude to, and that fear, that fear. Mother used to tell me, "Anybody in that little place--" You know, they had little, I don't know how to describe them, they looked, were little places that looked like, well, excuse me, but I have, let me go on in the bedroom and see if I can bring the little, bring the little thing in. (Break in tape.) I have something that looks, what looks like, that I got from Greece when I was there. Excuse me. DANE: Oh, yeah. LAKE: This is the Greek, this is the Greek-- but-- This is not the, the little buildings that they had, the little, that they had in Turkey. In Smyrna, a little thing, and it was very close to our home, very close to our home. And they put the people in there. The Turks used to put the people in there, any citizen that they had a notion to put in. And mother often used to ask me, "Anybody in there?" Or something. Oh, we could see it from our home. DANE: It was like a little jail, sort of? LAKE: A little jail. For temporary, temporary, of course. I suppose it was. I suppose it was. But I meant it resembled this-- DANE: So when you see the Statue it reminds you of-- LAKE: This, I mean this, uh, they had, they used to put them in there and then haul them down to the main, main headquarters. It was a total fear all the time of being, uh, jailed and not being able to get out. My father and mother used to say that, my mother, his brother, my uncle, when Dad had this thriving business, they had hired I don't know how many people, they couldn't, couldn't hack it, as they saw now. They couldn't do anything. They gave up. DANE: So in this country it meant-- LAKE: Oh, it meant freedom, real freedom. I should say it did. Well-- You appreciated it doubly. DANE: That's what people tell me all the time when I talk to them. They say American born people can't understand. LAKE:They don't understand what it is to be-- My husband, he had a terrible hate for the Italians because he had, his people had been deprived of speaking Greek in, uh, in his, on his side. So it was inbred in him, too. You know, Greeks are fighters. (She laughs.) We won, they won their-- And my mother had told me her family had been famous. I often wondered, wanted to look it up, which I failed to do. The Souliotiou family. It was the Souliotiou family. It was, I read somewhere once. I wanted to follow it up, you know. DANE: How do you spell Souliotiou? LAKE: S-O-U-L-I-- S-O-U-L-I-O-T-I-O-U. DANE: Perfect. Great. I think what we're going to do now is turn the cassette over and then I just have a few more questions. We're almost done. I just need to slate it. This is the end of Side One with Mrs. Lake, Number 176. It's 1:52 PM. END OF SIDE ONE BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO DANE: This is the beginning of Side Two of Mrs. Lake, Number 176. It's 1:54 PM. Just to finish up on a thought. You were just saying that your mother said that there's a difference between-- LAKE: She used to say there was great difference between freedom and license. People think they have a license to do anything they please. (She laughs.) She used to argue with people. When she came, they used to ask her whether she was going to conform with everything here. She said she was going to keep the good things and, keep the good things, and change the things that she had to change. For instance, she used to, some people liked it very much and others didn't. It was the custom there to, if anyone came to visit, you, even briefly, immediately to go and get something to drink and something sweet for them. We's make some dessert, jelly or something, but not jelly exactly. It was a very nice jelly. Preserves, most likely. And some people didn't like it. Others enjoyed it. There wasn't any harm. If there was anything that was wrong she wouldn't do it. If it was illegal. (She Laughs.) It wasn't a bad custom. DANE: Uh-huh. Before we leave Ellis Island, do you remember when you first arrived there what you were directed to do, where you went in the building, what your impressions were? LAKE: I don't remember much about that. I can't, my memory isn't too, too, you know how young I was. I was awfully young and excited to see my cousins. Id' been told I had cousins. It's a long time. I was always responsible for the younger ones, anyhow. DANE: Did you go from Ellis Island to-- LAKE: Ellis Island to Philadelphia, to my aunt's home at, uh, somewhere off North Market Street. They were off there. And we went to, directly to 1737 North Lambert Street and I remember the houses. They were row brick houses, red brick houses with marble steps. And the women would all come out in the morning and scrub, with their little caps on, come out and scrub their steps. The people next door were Mr. and Mrs. Horton, and I was so delighted there was a young girl there, too, with whom I could, I could talk to a little bit. Ruth Horton. And that was my favorite name, one of my favorite names, because the missionary in Smyrna, who used to live next door to us, had a Ruth, too. And I always said that Ruth was one of my favorite names and now I have a granddaughter named Ruth Lois. DANE: No kidding. When you came as a young person, and you spoke a little bit of English-- LAKE: A little bit. Enough to be put in the fourth grade. DANE: Do you remember if the children ever made fun of you? LAKE: Oh, did they make fun of us! Did they make fun of us, oh, heavens. Especially in Washington. Philadelphia was better. We spent a year in Philadelphia. I remember I wasn't miserable. The discipline in the schools was terrible there. Hmm, the discipline there was terrible in the schools. It was such a marked difference from the discipline in the old country. DANE: They were stricter-- LAKE: Oh, my goodness. We honored our teachers in the old country, we honored our teachers. There wasn't this-- We were taught first your parents and then your teachers, according to the philosopher. Which one was it? My memory fails me at the moment. Well, that was my mother's everlasting advice to us children. No matter how we disliked, whether we liked our teachers or not, we were to respect them. We weren't allowed to talk back to them, and do the things that were done, being done, have been done, to teachers in this country. DANE: So you were surprised in Philadelphia. LAKE: Oh, heavens, in Philadelphia I used to go home and tell my mother. And then, of course, she was instrumental here in Washington in starting the PTA. By going to the school and showing an interest. People just didn't show interest unless their children were totally-- And they just didn't show any interest in their children. DANE: And were the children, did you say the children were worse here in Washington? LAKE: Oh, heavens. We were, teachers were given authority to correct us, if we were doing something wrong, we were told off. I'm not sorry. At that time maybe I thought they were, I thought maybe, perhaps I thought-- But I'm not sorry that I was disciplined. I found that it helped me in life. I found that it helped me in life, in my, all the problems that I had to solve. DANE: Would the children call you names that you ever heard of? LAKE: Did they! Especially Greeks. DANE: Other Greeks? LAKE: They called us Greasy, you know. Grease. Greeks, and so on. Especially, I mustn't say this. (Murmurs off tape.) DANE: Interesting. And what, would it make you angry, or would you-- LAKE: Well, we were proud of the fact that mother always said, "Keep up your Greek." She wanted us to keep it up, because it helped me a great deal. We had word analysis. It's something unknown now, I understand from my children. But it helped me greatly. Because half of the words I learned were from my Greek, and I knew them right off the bat. I knew the definition. I know now, when a word comes up, instantly I know, it's of Greek. Once in a while I hesitate, at this stage, but oh, at that time it helped me greatly. But, uh, mother used to say, "Keep it up." But we were ashamed of it because we didn't want to be known as Greeks. You, when you have the, you don't have the courage of your convictions when you're young. And when you're ridiculed, people used to ask me if I was a, um. excuse me, I had one experience when I was, first time I was at Garfield Hospital. A nurse came in. They had my, my place of birth. She came in. She said, she took one good look at me, and she said, "Oh, I thought you were an Asiatic." She didn't even know where Asia Minor was (she laughs.) That was in 19, 19, uh, '30. 1930. It was in Washington, D.C. I had the other one in Washington, D.C., too. DANE: So did your mother, did you live near other Greeks, or did you-- LAKE: No. No. We did not. We did not, especially because of the fact that we were not Orthodox, you see. We didn't attend the Orthodox Church and we were sort of outcasts from the Orthodox Church. And, uh, we attended the, uh, first attended the methodist Church. Denomination was nothing to mother, just so it was a good Christian Church, believing in the Lord and Christ. And, uh, she, uh, then we attended the, we weren't very happy in the Methodist Church, so we went to a, uh, Presbyterian Church. I happen to be Presbyterian, since, my sons are Lutheran, one of my sons is a Lutheran. We're all the same thing, we're traveling the same road. One maker. DANE: I guess this is a good time now. We were talking before the tape started about your last name, your maiden name. If you would tell me what it is and tell me-- LAKE: Elefisiades. E-L-E-F-S-I-A-D-E-S. DANE: And did that mean-- LAKE: D-E-S, D-E-S, you know, the (?). D-E-S is very, very common in the language, as well as "los", L-O-S, the Greek ending. DANE: Now, did that name give you trouble? LAKE: Elefisiades. It means, Elefsis, Elefisis is coming, the word coming. Once my father had a notion of changing it to Cummings, but then he changed his mind. He used to say the nearest thing to it, he said, would ne Cummings, C-U-M-M-I-N-G-S. Just as well. DANE: When you first came to this country, though, was it a problem for you? LAKE: Oh, was it a problem! I don't know, some people, some people were very, very, very, very kind. All I had to do was spell it. Others would make such, I had a shorthand teacher in high school that was a nasty personality. I had others who, an English teacher, who thought the world of me. She had met my mother. In fact, I almost flunked Greek mythology because, well, I had the Greek mythology, I knew the Greek mythology, I had been taught it. I had good marks in it. I had to change all those names. I couldn't get the, I couldn't make the -- To me it was Athena, it wasn't Venus. I just, it wasn't Venus. It took me years to get through my skull, thick skull. I had to make that transition and connect the two. And it took me a long time. It, I had to make all those-- And, unfortunately, a great deal of it is distorted and stolen from the Greeks and made Roman mythology. Know what I mean? DANE: Yeah, I do. LAKE: I didn't, I didn't follow it up, because I didn't graduate from college. I had, I went to college, I went to the Life's College. DANE: That's right. That's right. Did your mother, it sounds like your mother had a very strong character and she seems-- LAKE: She was a strong woman, very strong woman. DANE: So when these people would make fun of your name, or you would feel different. LAKE: Well, she told us that we shouldn't, we just, they didn't know any better. To just forget it and not to, not to, uh, let it get us, let it get us, that's all. DANE: Did you miss Smyrna? LAKE: It was something, we should be proud of ourselves, keep ourselves clean and, and clean and she taught us the Ten Commandments. She said it was, would do more harm by disobeying those than making mistakes in something that didn't matter. That they could be corrected. DANE: Uh-huh. When you came over, did you miss Smyrna, did you miss everything that was familiar to you, or did you just adapt really easily? LAKE: I think I did, I adapted pretty easily. I think I did. And I longed to learn. We longed to learn. I was very fortunate in falling into the hands of some wonderful men in the school system, wonderful people. A Mr. Mirch, who was like a father to me. And a Mr. Haycock, of the district schools, and Mr., Dr. Kimball. And I used to, used to just sit there and drink it in, drink the English in, try to imitate them. And my vocabulary was a sad, in sad state when I graduated. I had grammar, good grammar, very good grammar foundations, grammatical foundations, but I lacked, uh, a vocabulary, which I needed to expand. And with the help, in the, uh, after I got started in the school system, I think, it was in '24 I started going down to GW at night, taking some courses. In '25 I, I was getting A's, straight A's, just taking two courses each evening. And, uh, in '27 I was taking something, two courses, and I got a B, so I said, I got an A - B. I got my-- (They laugh.) And my degree in the year I was married. It was in May. We were married in April and I was determined I was going to take those finals. But I never graduated, never had, everything went at sixes and sevens and I never got to graduate. DANE: Had you become an American citizen? When did you become an American citizen? LAKE: Well, under my father, of course, in 19, wait, I think 1918. DANE: Just became automatically? LAKE: The War. I think it was the year of the WAR. I think he, I think he got his naturalization, naturalized under your father when you're a minor. DANE: Uh-huh. LAKE: And I went to work for the, at 16 I went to work for the railroad administration. I was at Central High School. I went to Central at 15, at 13, at 13. I graduated from the elementary school at 13. Eighth grade. DANE: That's terrific. LAKE: That was mad. And, uh, from the old, uh, Adams School and, uh, then went to old Central High School for a little while, one semester, then the new Central opened. DANE: Do you think you would have been able to have, go through high school if you had stayed in Smyrna? Would you-- LAKE: I don't know. My mother was a great one for, for-- I don't know. They trained for teachers. I was going there to that elementary, to that American School. God, we would probably have been destroyed if we had stayed in Smyrna, my dear. DANE: When you met your husband, you were telling us an interesting story about him. LAKE: Yes. DANE: Tell us that again, if you would. LAKE: It was Lekatsas. Lekatsas. Lekatsas they called it in Greek, but he used to call it Lekatsas. So-- He came from Leucas, a little island. Leucas. And, uh, he spelled it L-E-K-A-T-S- A-S. So we changed, I changed it to L-E-K-A, L-A-K-E by reversing letters, the two vowels. DANE: And why was it? You told us before, but just, because we weren't recording. Why did you feel so strongly? LAKE: Because of the fact that I had been ridiculed with my maiden name so much that I wasn't going to pass on that torture, as I called it, mental torture, to my children, should I have some. But things changed after the wars. Names are accepted and not, uh, they are not, uh, commented on as they were before. But, intelligent people began to travel after the war. People began to open their eyes a little bit and they realized that Europe wasn't-- (She laughs.) Was not totally uncivilized. (She laughs.) DANE: Uh-huh. Uh-huh. And then, we're getting near the end now and I wanted to ask you, you touched on it before, but, you said in your letter something about America and democracy getting the idea from your homeland. LAKE: Well, democracy is, the word democracy is, demos is, demos is people, demos, democracy. Republic is the same, the Latin word, that's the Latin word. My mother used to have arguments, in fact, she had arguments with a man who was a lawyer in the Treasury Department, whose wife , wife was a very good friend of hers. And they lived around the corner, at 15th and, 15th and, uh, uh, S Street in Washington. He was a democrat. And mother used to tell him that the word-- She couldn't get it through her head why the republicans and the democrats, they were two parties and had the same name, because it meant the same thing. She couldn't get it through her head. She said since they differ so much, why do they have-- The democracy means the people, it means by the people in, republican means by the people in Latin. So there you are. She used to argue with him. I remember her standing at 1415 S Street where we lived, arguing with Mr. Long for hours sometimes. (She laughs.) I don't mean arguing in a way, friendly arguments they'd have. And years later, after she passed away, I met him on a bus once and he mentioned her and how wonderful she was. She was a wonderful woman, really. She taught, she taught at home. She wouldn't leave us. She passed, she took the examination and passed third, third, for night school, to teach in the night school, because she could go at night when Papa was home. Well, they never gave her a chance. And then she wanted to go to the Americanization school and they never gave her a chance. In fact, one woman on the Board of, the board, and I say that, she's dead and gone, she told a friend who went to find out, why should we take the bread from the, why should we take the bread from the children, give it to the dogs. DANE: Because your mother was Greek? Is that what she meant? LAKE: Uh-huh. DANE: Wow. LAKE: I'm not manufacturing this. I'm not. I'm making statements that are right , correct. It broke her heart. But she didn't, she didn't, uh, she just went on. She was a great one for prayer and she just rebounded all the time. She took the knocks. DANE: Now, why wouldn't they go back to Greece instead of coming to America? Why didn't they move to Athens, don't you suppose? LAKE: Why wouldn't they-- It was poverty stricken in, poverty was in Athens, my dear. And they couldn't go. I don't think-- We lost many friends, many of our-- I had one cousin who was here, on my father's side, who brought some people, some of her family over. I had a cousin who came, uh, who had a different name because his father was, had, uh, my grandparents had some, my two uncles had different, my two uncles had different names. And they, uh, he had been here to America, but he didn't like it and he went back to see his father and his father had been killed in, uh, the destruction of Smyrna. And so was he. Napoleon, his name was-- He was six months older than I. Many of them, I know. Mother worked, and I worked collecting money at one of the churches for, for those who, for the friends, and those who survived, at that time. So-- DANE: Would your parents talk about the events that were going on in Smyrna with the-- LAKE: Oh, surely. They used to talk about it. Surely. They used to discuss the-- In fact, when my parents, my father and my husband disagreed, one was a royalist and one was a-- (She laughs.) It was very zealous. I used to get so sick and tired of it. I used to tell them, "Where in America now. We're here now." They were both Americans, but they clung to it. Well-- DANE: Do you think your mother regretted coming here? Or-- LAKE: Oh, my mother was. loved America. She worshipped America. She gave her life, of course she didn't. She never-- DANE: And you, do you have strong feelings-- LAKE: My husband. I told my husband. He wanted us to go back. I said, "Never would I go back." That was-- And I told him, flatly, that was the understanding, that I would not go back. I was brought up here. I was an American. I would not, uh, I was, I had a double citizenship. I chose America as my home. My father chose it, and I was happy with it. I was proud to be of Greek descent. We have a great deal to offer to the world. We brought democracy to the world. Unfortunately, there are many things that I'm not proud of that my land is doing. My ancestors are not to blame. We're to blame. They're to blame. The present people are to blame. And their own, just as it is in this country. The wrongs that are done here are not to be on the past. Shouldn't be blamed on the past, should they? I'm proud of my ancestors, but I'm not, I never wanted to go back to live. I wouldn't be happy there. DANE: I think that's great. That was terrific. This is the end of Side Two with Mrs. Lake, Number 176, and it's 2:20 PM.