 janet:  	hey this is august 22nd 1995 and i’m here now in the ellis island oral history studio. i'm about to interview moore oblitiloff moore who is the twin sister of mary oblitiloff damian who has just been interviewed. moore maybe you would also like to say who else is here with you visiting ellis island.  moore: 	i’m here with my brother-in law rudy damian and my kid sister regina oblitiloff rutridge, she was born here she's the american citizen janet:  	natural born american? moore: 	right janet:  	okay, let's see. i wanted to say that mary, both moore and mary came from czechoslovakia in 1928 when they were six years of age. okay moore would you just give your birthdate and also the town in czechoslovakia where you were born? moore: 	i was born may 7th 1922 in medveja czechoslovakia. janet:  	you were in medveja, when you think of medveja what do you recall of the town?  moore: 	it’s a very beautiful agriculture farm life. we played an awful lot on the farms. crossing the bridge to go to my aunt and she didn't have any children so she doted over my brother, my twin sister and myself. janet:  	what was this aunt’s name? do you remember her name? moore: 	anna bobek janet:  	moore bobek? moore: 	my aunt?  janet:  	yeah moore: 	anna bobek. she was married to lipinski that was the last name. what i really remember the most is going to cross the bridge over that brook and evidently i fell off.  janet:  	you fell off? moore: 	the bridge and i hit my toe and the toenail has never grown since. when somebody sees my foot they'll always ask me how i got rid of my toenail. so i still remember how i fell off the bridge and lost my toenail. janet:  	were you named after this aunt moore? moore: 	evidently janet:  	was she someone that you were very close to as a child? moore: 	she was my mother's sister and yeah. the families are very close there to one another. probably they just name their children after their aunts, grandmothers, cousins. janet:  	do you remember any experiences when you went to visit your aunt?  moore: 	usually they just gave you food and you enjoyed having the food and they played with us. as i said they didn't have any children. we got all the attention that we needed as young children. janet:  	do you remember any of the foods that you ate before you came to this country that you liked? moore: 	yes. progas and they have them here in frozen food department. janet: 	do you know how to spell it?  moore: 	progas. p-r-o-g-a, progas. janet:  	how would you have it when you were a little girl in medveja? moore: 	you roll out the dough and you stuff it either with mashed potatoes or sauerkraut or cottage cheese and you boil them and then you sauté onions in butter. there they did not have olly hoff butter and they would put that sautéed butter over the progas and it was very, very good. we were raised on them or the potatoes.  my mother, when she's go out on the farm, that's what she would be doing. she would dig up the potatoes and people had a lot of potatoes for their meals. either mashed or just boiled. they raised their cows there. they had cream sweet milk homogenized milk and sour milk and got home from the farm, that's what you ate.  those boiled potatoes dipped in that milk and that was another milk and they raised their cabbage. in the fall they'd haul the heads of cabbage, shred the cabbage and store them in big barrels and that's what you would eat too also during the winter. the sauerkraut and it was very good. there’s many different ways that my mum used to fix it. so you ate that and you had chickens.  you raised chickens and on the holidays they would go, they would kill the chickens and we would have that on the holiday. sometimes you couldn't afford to kill that chicken because that chicken laid eggs and you were able to sell the eggs and get some money or exchange. make an exchange for the egg and you got some merchandise. you took your eggs to the market if you saw a blanket or something like that you could make the exchange for the eggs.  janet: 	do you remember market day? moore: 	no but i guess my mother did that because i don't remember the market days until we got older and i think that was when we were leaving medveja to go to europe and the train would stop and we'd see what was going on and my mother would explain it to us. but there was this sputnik, a town close by but we never went there because you went by horse and buggy or the cow or your mum got on the horse and she drove into town by herself and would bring some material. my mother worked on the farm, she worked on the fields. my older brother john he was two years old and he was our baby sitter. he took care of us. he build the fire, because it was cold in the fall in october and he was given some a horsy ride and that was on his back and he kicked up his legs and i fell into the fire. my stockings started burning and my shoe and by the time my mother reached me, the stocking and the shoe was really burning and i got third degree burns.  i remember my mother bringing me home and going into the cow barn and she stayed by the cow there and got the manure and she put it on my leg. that was the way she treated it. that was a home town remedy and she bandaged that. i don't know how but she made me walk. i've never had any severe scars or injury to it that disabled me from walking. i was able to walk all the time and that's what helped me from not forming the scars.  i think the burn was about two weeks old when she finally found someone to drive me into the next town sputnik and the doctor looked at me and he just thought my mother did very well, the way she treated the burn. later on when i went into service the physician that examined me, he asked me how i got that scar and i told them. see they knew about penicillin maybe before they knew about it in the states. janet: 	do you recall any other home remedy treatments from...? moore: 	yes. if you had sore throat by mother would cut garlic in half and rub the garlic on the cloth and she'd put that around your neck and off course she carried that on too when we got to america. if we had sore throats when we were young children, that's what she would do. of course we didn't like the smell. she gave you tea, hot tea with honey when you were having a cold. when you got a cut they washed it out with water and rubbed it with a little salt to get into the cut. they did a lot of soaking their sores. you stepped on a nail you just soaked your foot on salt water and they'd apply the pressure to that little entry with the nail wound in it till it started bleeding. it's what i remember when somebody would have an accident. janet: 	how about garlic and other kinds of spices or whatever, was that a popular thing? moore: 	no i don't remember having strong spices not like in italy. but i do remember having onions, fresh scallions, garlic, bay leaves and parsley. they used an awful lot of parsley and salt and pepper and vinegar. sugar and honey they used a lot of honey. janet:  	do you remember any festivities or big celebrations when you were small? moore: 	the greek orthodox have a lot of saint's days and usually in the town some of the ladies would prepare most of the food and the people would meet in somebody's home but it turned out always to be a religious form of events.  there was one time i remember where the church people and the priests would bring their banners down to the brooks of running water and he would bless the water. what holiday that was i don't remember but then when it turned out to be very festive. the people in the village would cook their meals and the people would join in the celebrations.  then the families would always get together around most of the holidays and cook their meals and just drink and enjoy it and celebrate the saint’s day. then when there was a wedding, it could take you about a week. there’d be parties in the groom's house and parties in the bride's house.  janet:  	before the wedding? moore: 	before the wedding, yes.  the day of the wedding the groom's party would come to the bride's house and all the relatives would just line up sit around in chairs and the bride would go to every family member and ask for forgiveness before the bride and groom went to church to take their vows. i remember, to me that was very sad. it wasn't a fun experience for me, i remember that. janet:  	what do you think it was that was so sad about it? moore: 	well the mother that she's getting rid of her daughter and she would have to go in and live with the groom, most of them. majority of the time, that's the way it happened janet: 	you mean the new couple would set up a household and the mother of the bride would go? moore: 	the bride and the groom would go to the groom's house and that's where they lived.  janet:  	oh, with the groom's mother and father? moore: 	right and if that bride and groom was out of town, the bride's mother felt she was really losing the daughter. she’s going to go live with the groom. then she wouldn't see her every day like normally she's have if she were in the same town. janet:  	you said that there about 15 families in town? moore: 	yes janet:  	was there a number of little towns with about 15 families that were living nearby? moore: 	yes. they were very close by. you would take maybe about 20 minutes to an hour to walk. they lived in cloistered type like... the families together. then their farms were way out. their farms were not like the farms here in america. they all lived together and then they had to go in their wagons to get to their farms.  janet:  	what was it like being in a town with 15 families, you have with when you came here, and communities are larger? moore: 	it was to us as children i think it was very intimate and you felt very close almost with anyone there.  because a lot of them were family and they just married and lived close by. they had cousins and or uncles. it wasn't a stranger to you there in the small town. i think in a sense it was very good, they got together they weren't lonely like they are sometimes in the states. if they weren't related to you they made be related to them.  i enjoyed that, yes i liked that very much it was different from america. i know my mom was very very lonely after her family because her family was very very close to her and my mom was the oldest. she assumed the responsibility and i'm sure she felt guilty that she had left them because their mom, her mom died when she was 19 years old and my mom was the oldest.  so she did as much she was able to. she wrote to them constantly, she sent them a lot of the packages. we were always getting packages ready to mail to europe.  janet:  	how about music or dancing, what part did that play in your life over there? moore: 	it played a very happy part of my life. i remembered their costumes, their dress. there was always musicians there. they sang constantly, they danced a lot. when we came to america, the only music we knew was from our church, our church dances and then as we got older, going to high school and then they had nicola uliun music for us and their teachers as their chaperones. the people in europe did a lot of singing and dancing, they were very happy people. janet:  	what would be an occasion for it, for dancing in your home? moore: 	any occasion. janet:  	so it was done like in a given week you'd have to have it? moore: 	yes, there was. all saints day unless it was advent or lent before easter and christmas and they didn't have the music but they had it all the time. in the parks. janet:  	is it russian orthodox or greek orthodox? moore: 	it was russian because it was near russia near polish border. greek orthodox is like from greece, marseille. but it was russian greek orthodox.  the family's lived together. then their farms were way out. their farms were not like the farms here in america. they all lived together and then they had to go in their wagons to get to their farms.  janet:  	what was it like being in a town with 15 families, you have with when you came here, and communities are larger? moore: 	it was to us as children i think it was very intimate and you felt very close almost with anyone there beause a lot of them were family and they just married and lived close by. they had cousins and or uncles. it wasn't a stranger to you there in the small town. i think in a sense it was very good. they got together. they weren't lonely like they are sometimes in the states. if they weren't related to you they made be related to them. i enjoyed that, yes i liked that very much it was different from america. i know my mom was very very lonely after her family because her family was very very close to her and my mom was the oldest. she assumed the responsibility and i'm sure she felt guilty that she had left them because their mom, her mom died when she was 19 years old and my mom was the oldest. so she did as much she was able to. she wrote to them constantly, she sent them a lot of the packages. we were always getting packages ready to mail to europe.  janet:  	how about music or dancing, what part did that play in your life over there? moore: 	it played a very happy part of my life. i remembered their costumes, their dress, there was always musicians there. they sang constantly, they danced a lot. when we came to america, the only music we knew was from our church, our church dances and then as we got older, going to high school and then they had nicola uliun music for us and their teachers as their chaperones. the people in europe did a lot of singing and dancing, they were very happy people. janet:  	what would be an occasion for it, for dancing in your home? moore: 	any occasion. janet:  	so it was done like in a given week you'd have to have it? moore: 	yes, there was. all saints day unless it was advent or lent before easter and christmas and they didn't have the music but they had it all the time. in the parks. janet:  	is it russian orthodox or greek orthodox? moore: 	it was russian because it was near russia near polish border. greek orthodox is like from greece, marseille. but it was russian greek orthodox. janet:  	was there music in the church? moore: 	yes they had music. their form of music was by choir. they didn't have… janet:	 an organ. moore: 	no, there was the choir, then we had a little piano but they don't have the type of music they had in this space. janet:  	do you remember going to school with your brother and sitting with him there. moore: 	yes we got very restless and we were sort of acting up and the teacher told us to leave the classroom. so we left, we waited till my brother got home from school because if we would have arrived home before my brother did , my mother would ask why and if you would tell her why we would have been disciplined. but i'm sure when my brother got home she found out because my brother was put out with cause he would never do anything like that he was a very good role model to both of us. janet:  	do you remember any other experiences with your brother growing up maybe in? moore: 	yes. he was very protective of us even in that little small town in czechoslovakia. then when we were on our way to america he took care of us on the train. he decided we wouldn't get lost and he spoke for us and if he was offered just one piece of candy he reminded the person that he had two sisters. he made sure he got something for his two sisters. then when we were on the ship, he was the leader. he took us all over the place and we walked into this huge bathroom and all we knew was water from the brook. we didn't have any water from the faucets. when we got into this bathroom, we didn't know what to do and when we did put the faucets on we were very interested and thought it was fun until we opened them all. the faucets. then we didn't know how to close them. that scared us. i guess the attendant to the bathroom happened to walk in and he saw us there. he was very kind to us. he knew we were very frightened. my brother was trying to explain to him what had happened. apparently he did not understand our language but he was very kind to us. he was very kind to us, he didn't throw us out. janet:  	do you remember seeing your first flashing toilet? was it on the ship? moore: 	no. evidently it was on but i do not remember now. i do remember our sleeping quarters. i thought we slept in this huge room with a lot of people there. my mother slept on the bottom bunk and there were many many bunks in that room. i remember if we didn't get lice in our hair that's what my sister related to the long bathtub. it was because we had lice and they gave us lice treatment. we had to stay there overnight. janet:  	before we talk about that, what do you recall about the preparations to leave?  moore: 	i remember my mother preparing us for years it seemed. as soon as we found out dad was working out his papers for our entry to the united states. he would write what we had to have ready and then some of my mom's lady friends went there ahead of her and they wrote to her that you can't have lice and you can't have any marks on your skin and make sure you don't have a cold. they refer to their eyes as pink eyes and if you have that they will not let you in. so my mum, i remember sitting on the doorstep with the door open. she'd always comb our hair looking for lice and when we got to the ship, we had lice and i'm sure it was from the mattresses. as a child, i just knew when she was pleased with us that she didn't find any lice when she let us go. we were always sitting by her then and she was cleaning our hair. janet:  	did you both have long hair? moore: 	we did. we had beautiful long hair sort of brownish reddish hair and it was very wavy and my mother just loved to comb it. she took pride in our hair. janet: 	how did you wear it? two braids? moore: 	two braids.  janet:  	let's see. as far as what was said to your mother by her friends who went earlier or by your father who was already here about what she needed to take with her. do you remember that? moore: 	no i don't remember her ever telling us that. they apparently had told her she didn't take too much luggage and i'm sure what she had written to her probably said you will not wear the clothes you're bringing with you. so my sister apparently left them for her sisters but she did bring a lot of pillows and feather bags and that's what she brought. janet:  	so your mother left the clothing mostly for her sisters? moore: 	the ones that she had, yes i would say that. janet:  	what was behind that? why was that true that you wouldn't wear the clothes over here? moore: 	yes that's right because they wore very different clothes from what they wear now.  janet:  	can you talk about that? moore: 	oh yes. pleated skirts, their pleated skirts it was just an art the way they made their clothes. their blouses were open run out with the round v-neck and pleats. just pleats all over. puffed sleeves with little tiny pleats and big ruffles. they were all handmade, they were all embroidered. that's one thing i regret that my mother left her clothes in europe because we don't have any. i understand my sister had my mother's one outfit. that's kind of too bad that we don't have any of that to show. we did have a lot of aprons because her sisters would make the aprons and send them to her. but they were just embroidered they were not ruffled or pleated or smocked. they were a lot of smocked clothes there. janet:   	do you remember the departure? do you remember saying goodbye to your grandparents? moore: 	yes. it seemed they were crying for an awful long time by the time we left. when the sisters would get together when they start crying i really thought this was the day we were leaving. good. but it wasn't. they did cry because they realized that they probably would never see her again. my mother being the only one leaving she knew she would be alone there without her sisters.  janet:  	do you remember anything that anybody told you? maybe advice or anything like that before you left?  moore: 	no i don't remember. maybe my oldest aunt fast to be good children to my mother. we were quite small and she was young and brave to do that. naturally as children we were very excited. we just couldn't wait to get to america. janet:  	did you have any expectations of america or of your father before you came? moore: 	yes. i think i had and apparently i took to the image from one of my uncles and in how he would be dressed when we would see him. but i had no idea when i would sit on his lap he had that woolen suit which didn't impress me very much. i didn't know him and we felt very uncomfortable. naturally he took us on his lap and hugged us. i was very anxious to get off his lap as soon as i was able to. we were bashful of him because we didn't remember him. janet:  	did he look like you had imagined him? moore: 	well, i cannot answer that question. janet:  	okay. do you remember leaving on the wagon? moore: 	oh yes i do remember leaving. that to me was very sad and cruel when we were leaving because they were just crying and i think crying behavior of people like is very frightening to a child. i felt if america must be a bad place, why they are crying for us like that. i didn't realize it was the attachment to the relatives. we were attached to my mother. i wasn't concerned with leaving anyone else. my mum was the one that was going with us and if she's going to be there everything was going to be alright. why should they be crying like, that's my impression. janet:  	do you remember anything from the time you left the town until you arrived to the port where the adriatic left then? moore: 	yes i remember. the train impressed me very much  janet:  	well this is really the first time you had travelled out of your little town.  moore: 	oh yes. the first time i travelled out of the little town was going to sputnik to have this medical attention for my burned leg and that town was probably just about six miles away.  we just didn't have any reason to go. we had everything in that little town. if you didn't have [0:02:42.3] [inaudible] janet:  	what impressed you when you went to the port? moore: 	the other cities and the towns while looking out the window. that’s when i first experienced my butterflies in my stomach that i am really leaving them and the bigger cities we went through it was frightening. i don't remember what city we stopped in but my brother opened the window and the people in the train station, they were very friendly. it seems they knew that we were going to america. they were all coming to the window and shaking hands with us. this one man gave us a candy bar, our first candy bar, chocolate candy bar. janet:  	you had never seen one? moore: 	no. i don't know if he gave us three or if he just gave one but i was sitting by the window. i remember my brother reaching across and getting the candy bar. there was a trip. then going into brendon, getting on the boat. it was congested naturally and to a small child, i'm sure we had this smothered like feeling many times because of the pushing and the shoving. everybody is trying to get their packages and baggage on with them.  janet:  	so the adriatic sailed from where? moore: 	i think it sailed from brendon then to liverpool.  janet:  	now you mentioned some things about the ship. is there anything else about the passage that you remember that you haven't already mentioned? moore: 	no i don’t remember the type of food we had on ship. i just remember those long tables and this man that was so kind to my mom took us to the dining room with us and he told my mother he would take care of us and then we would take some of the food to her. one did the food with an orange. i will never forget this now and the way the juice squirted out of the slice of the orange. i think to this day when i be eating an orange and the juice squirts out it reminds me of my first orange.   janet:  	would it taste good to you? moore: 	yes extremely good. janet:  	had you ever heard of an orange? moore: 	no never. never heard of oranges we had pears and apples and cherries. that was the extent of our fruit.  janet:  	do you remember the ship coming into the new york harbor? moore: 	i do remember it coming into the harbor and i don't remember spending the night on the ship or getting into the little boat to get ellis island.  janet:  	what was your impression of ellis island? moore: 	this push and shove and getting scared and remembering what my mother was always looking for us. i wondered if i had red eyes that morning and so i wouldn't limp going up the stairs. didn't have any rash on the body. i hope i heard him what he was asking me so he wouldn't think i were deaf and just wanted to get through it and go and reach america. i didn't realize i was in america. janet:  	you must have heard about ellis island beforehand?  moore: 	my mother's lady friends used to write to her in what to expect. so we knew what was going to happen but we just did not realize the crowd.  janet:  	so then do you remember being met by your relatives and taken to hoboken? moore: 	no, not as well as my sister does. i do not remember that very well. janet:  	do you remember when you got to your father? moore: 	i remember when my father came and picked us up. janet:  	he came to hoboken? moore: 	yes he came and picked us up. janet:  	what do you remember about that particular moment? moore: 	well i was excited that he was our american father. we were going to be part of america. i was glad to meet my father.  janet:  	what was like for you getting used to not having a father after not having been with one all those eyes? moore: 	it was hard. like my sister said, he disciplined us constantly and not having a man around the house i think we sort of feared him and he probably felt we needed it and maybe he just did that because he realized he didn't have any part in bringing us up until the time he saw us. he was the father and he was the one was going to lead the family that we europe in the home. janet:  	do you remember any changes in your mother after she came here?  moore: 	yes i do remember. i think she really was anxious to be a part of america. i think she pushed us more to americanize us than any mom or my mum's lady friends in the town in monaca pennsylvania. she immediately started working for her citizen papers and she told us not to mention it to any of her friends because she was ashamed they would tease her. because those women that came to america did not look for their citizen paper. janet:  	in other words they were holding on to the czechoslovakian roots? moore: 	yes and my mom did not for her children's sake. she really wanted us to be americanized. as much as she was able to and as fast as she was able to. janet:  	as was your father also, did he also feel that way? moore: 	no my father did not want to leave his roots. we were not allowed to speak english language in the home. that was difficult for us because the only contact we had with americans and the american language was when we went to school. now school was very hard for me. for my sister it was not. but we were kept two years in the first grade because we could not master the language or the reading. janet:  	do you remember learning the language and the problems it had for you? moore: 	yes it was very hard for us and the teachers realized that and they kept there in the second year. my mother used to get a neighbor girl to come to our house to help us to read and she paid her a quarter. a quarter was a lot of money at that time. but once we were able to speak the english language we got along well. not well, we weren't students but we passed. janet:  	this neighbor was she also from czechoslovakia? moore: 	no her parents were born in america and she was an american child. now maybe her grandparents were immigrants.  janet:  	do you remember anything about the czechoslovakian community in menorca? moore: 	yes. i think maybe that's what held us back because we were among our own and we weren't made or forced to learn about the american customs. i think if they weren't that many we would have been forced to go out and learn the american ways a lot sooner. janet:  	were there ways that your mother or that you have retained that are those czechoslovakian ways? moore: 	oh yes till now till my mother's death five years ago we always spoke to her czech. i could not speak american to her. it's because we had to speak the czech language at home and my mother did not like that. she said speak to me in english so i would learn the language. she knew her way around and i think sometimes those friends of hers resented her more because my mother was able to read the funny papers, my mother was able to get on the bus or train and go to new york city where the other ladies were not. so i admire my mother. she was the one that had a lot to do. janet:  	how about yourself? do you consider yourself part czech and part american? how do you..? moore: 	no, i'm an american. i don't like the idea that , that's my personal idea, i feel that if you come to america that's why you came here and be americanized. my family was extremely patriotic and my children friends found out that i was born in czechoslovakia and my children would say, don't say anything she's the most patriotic american that i have ever known.  janet:  	do you think that that patriotism stems in part from the fact that you did that you started out in another country and then came here? moore: 	yes i think so. i appreciate what we have here. that absolutely no comparison. there isn't any other country in this world like united states.  janet:  	tell me about when you finished school, then did you work for a while after school? moore: 	i worked in the summer time when we moved to new jersey and we graduated from high school in pennsylvania. i did house wait for a month and then i went into forceman because it was during the war and they were paying a lot of money. $70 in a week. i knew i was going into nursing to train. that's when i realized when i went into training how different america was from czechoslovakia. see we didn't have very many american friends in this coal mine. it was always under the czechoslovakian family until i went away to school. it really wasn't the american way life and yet it was. it was a lot better. we just spoke the czech language in church. our social activities were around the church. our music was around the church. janet:  	where did you go to school?  moore: 	in patterson new jersey in saint joseph's hospital in nursing. then i went into service in the air force and i was there 10 years. i just loved it.  janet:  	when did you meet your husband? moore: 	in england. he was from oklahoma. janet:  	he was in the air force also? moore: 	yeah. we married and have four children, three girls and a boy. janet:  	what's your husband's name? moore: 	max moore. he's an orthodontist and we have nine granddaughters no grandsons.  janet:  	what are your children's names? moore: 	judy, marie and cheryl and robert. janet:  	i should have asked you earlier but do you remember the depression and what effect it had on you? moore: 	well, i don't know it had any effect. it was toward the end of the depression. that was the only town that we lived in. i just assumed that's how everybody lives. i was not aware of the depression. everybody lived that way. we didn't know we were poor. like i said till i went into school, but our friends, most of them were all on public welfare and so this is the way of life.  janet:  	how about when the second world war was building up. do you remember what you thought and felt or what you...? moore: 	we thought it was terrible. we couldn't believe why anybody would want to fight us. because here we had everything, everybody was so kind in america.  why would anybody want to start a war? but then we were in high school and we were understanding why they were fighting, wanted to fight.  why japan attacked us and why hitler was going through europe. we knew about the war because my mum used to get her mail from czechoslovakia and she'd sit down and read us those letters to us. that upset us because all our relatives where there. my mum was the only one here with my dad.  janet:  	so it was personal for your family? moore: 	it was very personal. janet:  	do you remember your motivation for signing up with the air force? moore: 	i think the way my mother instilled this patriotism, we really were very patriotic. when i went to high school those bands would play. even now sometimes it sends goose bumps through me and it's sort of subconsciously does relate to the hard times in their bands, their military music. not that we heard about a [0:05:20.2] [inaudible] in the farming town where we were raised. my mother used to tell us about that. it's just i think we did that because we knew how good we had it in america. the american people really don't realize the other countries how they are. there's no comparison in this world. america is the best. i shouldn't say america. i should say the united states. i was corrected so many times when i was in england. the english people didn't like when we referred to america, because it wasn't america, it was the united states. they said remember there's canada above you. which was right, correct? janet:  	how is this phase of your life now that you're retired? moore: 	well, it's very good. it's very restful because it's only in america you can do this if you work hard enough and you could do almost anything you want to in america and you grow in america. in europe at the time we were raised and my parents were raised once a farmer always a farmer, once a shoe maker always a shoemaker. in america it isn't this way. you have the money and you have the motivation, you can go forward. my mother became a citizen because of her son. she said someday he won't be able to say i can't get that job mom because you weren't a citizen. my mother just wanted my brother to get a government job that he would be well enough and secured enough if he worked to death for the government.  janet:  	did he? moore: 	no. that was her way of thinking that he would have a government job and if he would not get a government job it was because she did not become a citizen. she wanted to be a citizen and when she became a citizen, my dad was and that helped us to automatically become citizens because they both were citizens before we reached twenty one.   janet:  	do you remember the day that your mother became a citizen? moore: 	yes i remembered this man that worked in the court house came and picked her. i was in high school and i could not concentrate and it was so exciting. we were so excited but we were not allowed to tell that to anybody.  janet:  	so he picked her up and took her to the courthouse? moore: 	courthouse and he helped her and i remember questioning her and the only question i remember vividly was, "mom who picks the president?" and she said," people pick all presidents." but there were other questions that i had to ask her. then when we got home from school my mother gave us the news and because the judge told her, "yeah you got your citizen paper."  janet:  	was that a celebration?  moore: 	no just between us. my mother worked her way through. i don't think she even told my dad but for a couple of days till the situation was such. her lady friend, my mother i don't think went and told them, “i’m an american citizen." because they'd make fun of her and she didn't want that.  janet:  	so it was really you and your sister and brother and your mother who knew?  moore: 	that’s right and we knew what she was working at. and she learned how to read the american like signs by reading the funny papers.  janet:  	so you and your mother and sister and brother really went through a lot together moore: 	yes, we helped each other we were the support group. she was the leader. during the depression, some of the people, the american had cars and my mother would always say, children there's a better way of life. and i'd always she say but she didn't go how does she know that there's a better way of life. she says i could feed you and she looked at me and she says i could make your clothes but she said you had to get it all and put it up her.  she said there’s a better way of life because she knew what the other americans had in that small town. she knew her husband was a coal miner and he would stay there that's the kind of life he would have. when we got out of high school we went to new jersey, we were able to get a start easier in the larger town.  janet:  	now is regina your only sister or brother born in this country? moore: 	no we had another one she did, pneumonia and i had to tell this in front of her but i don't think my mother wanted to have another child but she was determined to have an american citizen born.  janet: 	so regina is an american citizen? moore: 	yes that's right. my mom came in and she was determined. she was very patriotic she was just so happy to be here in america and raise her children would have a better way of life. she didn't care for herself it was for her children.  janet:  	okay. is there anything else you can think of that has to do with coming here as a six year old and living your life here? moore: 	it was very exciting and the older we get the more thankful we are that we are in america and thank my father for bringing us here. janet:  	okay, let's end here. i was speaking with anna moore who came from czechoslovakia at six years old in 1928 and this is janet ravine for the national         