 kate: 	good morning. this is kate moore for the national park service. today is the 26th of january 1994 and i'm in san marcos, california at the home of belzman belzman who came from czechoslovakia in 1926 when she was 8 years old.  why don’t you begin by giving me your full name and date of birth please? belzman: 	ann belzman i was born march 5th 1917. kate:	and what was you maiden name?  belzman: 	anna goldmann. kate:	could you spell that please?  belzman: 	g-o-l-d-m-a-n-n kate: 	and where were you born? belzman: 	i was born in czechoslovakia. kate:	and the town? belzman: 	also misle. kate:	could you spell that please? 	a-l-s-o m-i-s-l-e [chuckles]. kate:	and do you remember what the town looked like could you describe it? belzman: 	it was a village [inaudible 00:01:03] we had a—well across the street from my home and there was a river, i don’t know at that time it seemed like a long way off but i think it was maybe a mile from my home. kate:	and what was the major industry in that village what did people do for a living? belzman: 	i really don’t know. i know my grandfather had a flour mill.  kate:	a floor mill. belzman: 	aha. belzman: 	but the other people i don’t remember [chuckles]. kate:	what was your father’s name? belzman: 	max. kate:	max and what was his occupation? belzman: 	well he was in the army in hungary and then he came to america and he worked he was in the lighting fixture business here. he was here three years before we came. kate:	what did he look like? how could you describe how he looked? belzman: 	oh, handsome [laughs]. kate:	how tall? belzman: 	about five nine i imagine and medium brown hair. i don’t really know little bit like roosevelt theodore-- like franklin. kate:	franklin roosevelt.  belzman: 	yeah. kate:	and what was his personality and temperament? belzman: 	very quiet had a terrific sense of humor. never knew whether he was telling you the truth or not. because [chuckles] he was always telling stories but nothing really bothered him, very easy going. kate:	was there a story about your father that you associate with your childhood at all? belzman: 	yes, i remember he took me i don’t know where on the train and he bought me a watch and he told me don’t tell them because he had to pay duty on it when we came back. and he says, i remember him telling everybody he says the first thing she said, “look at the new watch my daddy bought me [laughter]”.  kate:	exactly what he told you not to.  belzman: 	exactly what he told me not to say i think i must have been five years old at the time [laughter]. kate:	how about your mother’s name what was it? belzman:	dora tronstein please. kate:	could you spell it? belzman:	  t-r-o-n-s-t-e-i-n. kate:	and what was-- that was her maiden name then.  belzman: 	yes. kate:	what was her occupation? belzman: 	a housewife. kate:	what did she look like? belzman: 	dark, she almost-- people used to take her for mexican when we were here in america. kate:	and how tall was she? belzman: 	five four. a little bit heavy set. kate:	what about her personality and temperament? belzman: 	she had a temper but very very--i don’t know easy going actually very nice, everybody loved her. kate:	what about a story about your mother do you remember anything  belzman: 	i really don’t remember too much. she was—in europe, she was going back and forth all the time to my father-- to her in-laws and then i stay with my grandparents in this village.  kate:	you stayed a lot with your grandparents? belzman:	yes. kate:	who whose parents? belzman: 	her parents? my mother’s parents. kate:	were you particularly close to anyone in the family then? belzman: 	i don’t think so i don’t know i can’t really remember. kate:	so was it your grandmother your grandfather that took care of you? belzman: 	i guess so. kate:	okay, could you name all your brothers and sisters in order of their birth? belzman: 	it was mel--the brother after—i’m the oldest then there was my brother leslie. kate:	how old much younger? belzman: 	four and a half years. then we came to america and my brother freddie was born nine months later. [chuckles] and then two years after that, my brother eugene. and then i think it was almost 10 years that my sister barbara was born. kate:	now if we go back to czechoslovakia do you remember your house? belzman: 	yes, there was upstairs and downstairs. and then and downstairs they had a store. kind of like a little grocery store. i remember once i got the devil for opening up the store one morning without my grandfather, i went and got the keys and i was selling cigarettes, [laughter] i was six years old.  i almost got killed for that [laughter]. and then in upstairs was the living quarters and there was a huge kitchen with a tile oven. and in fact we could kind of sit up there you know. it’s hard to describe. kate:	how about the oven? belzman: 	well it was, it’s hard to describe but it was a big kitchen i remember that and then what else? kate:	how many bedrooms were there? belzman: 	two, one was used as a bedroom, and then and then there was -- as you came in there was an entry. and from the entry you could go into the kitchen on one side and into a bedroom on the other side and then on the other side of the other bedroom was another big room. and i think there was kind of like a [inaudible 00:06:35] can’t remember too much about it and after that room was another bedroom. i remember my aunt having her baby in there. screaming for three days [laughs]. kate:	how was your house heated then? belzman: 	i can’t remember that. kate:	what about lights? how was it lit? belzman: 	kerosene lamps i think, and oh there was an attic, we used to bathe up there. out house in the back outside, no bathroom indoors. kate:	well, bathe in the attic? anne:	in the tub. kate:	so where would you heat the water? belzman: 	i don’t know where they heated it. i can’t remember, i don’t remember think of that anymore [laughter]. kate:	and did you keep any animals at all? belzman: 	i think we had a dog, and then they had chickens and geese and big flock of geese. i remember taking them to the river once. i thought i’d lost them but they knew their way home so [laughs]. kate:	how old were you then? anne:	oh i don’t know must have been around seven or maybe younger. i don’t know.  kate:	and the grocery store was owned by whom? belzman: 	my grandfather and he had a mill in the back, a flour mill. kate:	i see and how big? what did he sell at the grocery store? belzman: 	gee, i don’t remember candy, odds and ends i guess. kate:	flour. belzman:	flour i imagine yeah i really don’t know too much about that. kate:	who did the cooking in your family? belzman: 	oh, my grandparents, mother and then we always had help. the peasants there came in and worked. kate:	where did your grandparents live? anne: 	my mother’s parents lived in misle in the village kate:	and you– belzman: 	 that’s czechoslovakia. kate:	who owned the--which parents owned the store? belzman: 	my grandparents. kate:	which, who’s--? belzman: 	my mother’s parents. kate:	mother’s parents? they lived in the same village but not in the same building? belzman: 	yes, we all lived. oh you mean before that? i don’t remember living anywhere else except in kasa for a while. kate:	where is kasa? belzman:	well that was, i think its part of hungary. i’m really not sure. kate: 	how do you spell it? belzman: 	well they call it kushiton czech but kasa in hungarian k-a-s-a. kate:	now the other thing i was asking was in this building with the store where you lived on top in the store, did your parents live with you? belzman: 	yes. kate:	oh they did? belzman:	well they owned the home. kate:	so they lived and so you had two bedrooms where did you sleep you and your brother? belzman: 	i lived with my-- i slept with my grandparents sometimes, sometimes in the other bedroom i don’t’ know it’s just they pushed me around [laughs]. kate:	do you have any anecdotes about your grandparents at all? belzman: 	not really, only thing i remember is getting balled at for selling cigarettes that day. kate:	 what about religious life at home? belzman: 	my grandparents were very orthodox. kate:	was there anywhere temple nearby or anything--? belzman: 	no they--my grandfather used to walk miles to go to the temple every saturday. kate:	and what about your parents? belzman:	i don’t remember them doing anything like that. kate:	how did you practice religion in your home? belzman: 	my mother did light candles on fridays nights. kate:	did you keep kosher? belzman: 	oh yes. kate:	and what about the high holidays? belzman: 	oh we kept all of those kate:	and did you suffer any religious persecution or prejudice of any sort? belzman: 	no. kate:	so what about holiday celebrations, what was your favorite? belzman: 	i don’t know, i think passover probably. kate:	and could you describe how you celebrated? belzman: 	 i really can’t remember too much of that. kate:	you were small. what about school life? belzman: 	i went to school there in the village. and they hit you on your hand with a ruler if you weren’t good. i think i got hit once, i don’t know why, but i did. and all the children there used to go to school barefooted except me. kate:	why didn’t you go? belzman: 	i wore shoes [laughs]. i didn’t like the gravel under my feet. there was no bathroom and there was a big yard in the back of the school where they had bushes and kids used to go back there. so i never went of course i was allowed to go to the teachers’ bathroom somewhere there and-- you see there’s a cast there was you know difference the peasant and there was the aristocrat or the upper class. and i was considered more of the upper class. kate: 	but you went to school with both? belzman:	oh yes. kate:	was the school crowded?  belzman:	not too. no, i don’t think. kate:	how many people were in each class? belzman: 	i can’t remember. there was more than one grade in each room you know. kate:	do you remember any teachers or playmates that time? belzman: 	not really. kate: 	what was your favorite subject? belzman: 	i can’t remember. kate:	okay did you learn english prior to coming to america? belzman:	no. kate:	did your parents learn any english before they came to america? belzman:	i don’t know if my dad did but my mother didn’t. kate: 	what did you do for fun and entertainment when you were a child what types of games did you play? belzman: 	to tell you the truth, i don’t remember any of that. i do remember one aunt. she used to take me to into the city once in a while. but i can’t remember too much about playing. kate:	well what about america, whose idea was it to come to america? belzman: 	my dad’s sister was here in america.  kate: 	where? belzman:	in california in los angeles. and her--she was married and her husband was very ill, so they asked my father to come and work with him in the electric business. they made chandeliers, crystal chandeliers and all that kind of thing. so that’s why he was here and then we had to wait three years for our quarter before they let my mother and the two children come. kate:	so do you remember them discussing his leaving? belzman:	no. kate:	his passes was paid by whom? belzman: 	i guess himself really. kate:	and do you remember getting ready yourself to go. do you remember your mother explaining anything to you?  belzman: 	no they never told us anything not like parents today [laughter]. kate:	well what about getting packing and things like that? do you remember that?  belzman: 	no, i remember somebody giving me farewell an orange and then somebody else gave me a diary and they all wrote in it. i still have it. kate:	and do you remember them hugging or goodbye. anne:	oh yes, everybody kissed us goodbye and tears. kate: 	how did your grandparents feel about it?  belzman:	i’m sure they were crying you know, my mother was crying. i don’t know. i can’t remember what i was doing [laughter]. kate:	and how much did you pack? do you remember what you took with you? anne:	no. kate: 	did you take anything personal besides your diary and the orange? belzman: 	i had a necklace i took and then my dad said, “don’t bring anything because they had everything in america.” so my mother left a lot of nice things there that--. she did bring some a lot of linens of hers that she had from [inaudible 00:14:32] so but yeah that’s about all.  kate:	and who came and then how—who came was your brother? belzman:	my brother and myself and mother. kate: 	alright, what port did you leave from? anne:	france, schuberg is it? kate:	schuberg.  belzman:	yeah. kate:	and how did you get from your home to this port—to schuberg? belzman:	first we went to germany on the train i guess. kate:	and do you remember getting from your house to the train? belzman:	we were in a wagon.  kate:	drawn. belzman:	drawn horse wagon kate:	and who came with you to the station? belzman:	i don’t remember.  i can’t remember. kate:	right, and so-- belzman:	i know there were several people there but i can’t remember exactly. kate:	but there were people at the station saying goodbye. belzman:	oh sure. kate:	and so you got in to the train and the train took you where? belzman:	i guess to germany then we-- i remember going to france because brother--my dad’s younger brother, youngest brother was living in paris. so we stayed with him overnight. i had my first banana there, didn’t even know what a banana was and peanuts and he brought them in the shell and i remember putting the whole thing in our mouths we didn’t know we were supposed to-- it was horrible [laughs]. kate:	you mean put in the peanuts in the shells in your mouth? belzman:	then he told us how to eat them. and that’s about all i remember in paris until we get on the ship and came here. kate:	alright so you remember the ship what it looked like? belzman:	a little bit. i remember the dining room had big long white table white table clothes on it and we couldn’t speak english. my mother met a man up there that could speak english and hungarian so he kind of interpreted for her, and of course she was sea sick most the time. kate:	so what class did you --? belzman:	2nd class. kate:	2nd class i see. and what was the name of the boat? belzman:	mauritania. kate:	mauritania. belzman:	hmmm. kate:	 do you remember the day, the month and year the ship departed? belzman:	it would be in there wouldn’t it? kate:	 we can check later with the-- belzman:	no i don’t remember i know it took five days. and my brother got lost in the ship one day. he was-- we thought he was lost in fact they almost stopped the ship because they couldn’t find him they thought maybe he fell overboard and he had found his way back to the cabin and there he was playing [chuckles]. kate:	so how long was he lost? belzman:	over an hour. we didn’t know where he went. everybody was running around like mad looking for him. kate:	and he was how old then? anne:	about three and a half. kate:	i see, did you do look after him in the boat. belzman:	somebody else my mother was talking to had to go down to search for something and some else was supposed to be watching him and you know you turn your back on the kid and he’s gone [laughs]. kate:	and do you remember what the accommodations where you slept were like? belzman:	not really i guess there were--it was in a cabin. kate:	remember the food was it any good or not? belzman:	well i remember eating a lot of mashed potatoes because that’s about all we knew how to say and you had to order your food and then i saw somebody had jello mold, so we pointed to that and said we  want that. i didn’t like it. i still am not too crazy about jello. kate:	so you were hindered a little bit by your language? belzman:	oh terribly yes. kate:	so did you have a sense of humor about it or was it sporadic? belzman:	 oh i don’t know i guess it was alright we got along we didn’t starve and then the night before we arrived they had a big ball and i got up there and watch them and have-- my mother was sick. she was sea sick most of the time. and my brother was asleep and she said i could go up and watch them dance   kate:	 and what that was like? describe the dance. belzman:	well you know they danced in 1920s. kate:	no i don’t. belzman: 	oh you don’t -you wouldn’t what’d you seen movies [laughter], i guess the charleston, i really don’t remember too much about it but they were having a good time, so i sat there and watch it. kate:	do you remember seeing land for the first time? belzman:	not really, i don’t know there was a lot of confusion. oh i remember another thing before we got to, i don’t remember before we got to america before got on the ship, we had been playing with some woman’s children, she had five children she was coming with and then of course they examine you for coodies and stuff.  kate:	coodies [chuckles]. before you got on the ship? belzman:	yeah. and they had to shave they shaved oh i’m sorry they shaved her head and all five children they found lice. and then we had been playing with them so they said we had it too but i didn’t so they shaved my brother’s head but my mother bribed them and they only shaved underneath my, just in the back underneath so they didn’t take all my hair off. kate:	so there were children on the boat who had shaved heads?  belzman:	well they-- i don’t know where they were after that i think they were down [inaudible 00:20:26] or somewhere because i near saw them again after that kate:	how did your mother bribe them with what? belzman:	money. kate:	money [laughs]. you saw it? belzman:	i don’t know but that what she said. i don’t know if she did or not. she was talking to him and talked to him. i don’t know if she gave them anything or not but she did tell them that --talked them out of shaving all my hair up.  kate:	you said that they examined you for coodies but what --how extensive was that examination before you got on board? belzman:	they just looked at our hair  kate:	i see you know. belzman: 	for lice i guess. i call them coodies [laughter]. kate:	alright now what else do you remember ever seeing the statue of liberty? belzman:	no. i don’t. kate:	so basically were probably asleep?  belzman:	either that or my mother was trying to get in touch with—i have had my brother-- my father’s sister and husband were living in new york. and my mother was planning on staying with them for two couple of days after we get there and then come onto california. i don’t know what happened i all i know is there was a lot of confusion and they took us to ellis island and then she called him from there and trying to remember, i was reading my mother’s-- she wrote a kind of like a diary. she said that our tickets hadn’t gotten to new york yet to come to california and all she had was $100 i don’t know if it was hungarian money or american money.  	but anyway it wasn’t enough for us to stay in new york, so we had to stay over a night in ellis island till she got our tickets to california. so my uncle came and visited us there and that’s when my cute little brother took off his tag that they put on us you know and hang it on my uncle.  so they wouldn’t let him off the ship, i mean off of ellis island because i don’t know if it didn’t have a name it just said foreigner or i don’t know what it said. so they had to go get his citizenship papers to show them that he belonged in new york.  kate:	so your brother took his tag off and put it on your uncle and he they said he couldn’t leave [laughter]? belzman:	oh he was a devil. kate:	your brother. belzman:	yeah. oh, he was a devil my little brother. kate:	but he didn’t know that would happen. belzman:	no. he didn’t, he was just fooling around you know [laughter]. kate:	but then they let the little boy go let your brother go? belzman:	no kate:	they should take him-- belzman:	i don’t know. they were stupid. kate:	what do you remember of ellis island do you remember getting on? belzman:	i remember my mother seeing my aunt and uncle for i don’t know they were busy talking and then it was dinner time, and they had separate rooms. they had one room for the jewish people, kosher food and another room for the gentile people and i don’t know how i ended up in the gentile room [chuckles]. i guess being blonde and they just had [inaudible 00:23:55] oh they were very nice they gave me a doll and gave my brother some toys. kate:	on ellis island. belzman: 	yes kate: 	and who did that.  belzman: 	oh i’ve got to get a kleenex. my nose is running. kate:	they were very nice to you belzman:	oh yes. and we slept in nice clean beds and i remember the tables all with table clothes and food, my mother’s looking for me and i was in the wrong room. well, being blond i guess they figured --couldn’t tell whether i was jewish or not. kate:	do you remember being examined medically at ellis island?  belzman: 	no kate:	you said that --was it clean, the place? belzman:	yes, as far as i can remember. kate: 	so you stayed overnight and then what happened? belzman:	then they took us to the train. kate:	who’s they? belzman:	well some man i don’t know who he was i can’t remember what he looked like. they escorted us to the train and i remember walking through the streets and kids yelling at us foreigners because we still had our tags on. kate:	what did your tags say? belzman: 	i don’t know i don’t-- kate:	so people were yelling foreigners from the street?  belzman: 	yeah. kate:	and was that on the way to the train?  belzman:	yeah i don’t know i guess-- did it slip? kate:	is that all they yelled was foreigners? belzman: 	yeah. kate:	yeah. and when you got on the train, describe that trip. belzman:	i can’t remember too much. i took five days to get to california. kate:	did you have a sleeping place? belzman:	i don’t remember, it’s funny i cannot remember anything about that train i don’t know why—it’s just-- kate:	alright where did you go to once you got off the train? who was there? belzman: 	los angeles. belzman:	my dad was there of course. and he took us to my aunt’s home and they had just built a new hotel in that neighborhood. i don’t know if you are familiar with la, it’s called boyle heights section it was a very exclusive jewish section in those days. and they built a very beautiful hotel there and he had rooms there for us.  kate:	and do you remember the reunion of your mother and father and--? belzman:	well i know everybody was crying and kissing and all that kind of stuff and then i remember getting to my aunt’s and she had five children one was-- the youngest was still kind of a baby i think she maybe a year old.  she had lost her husband in the meantime he died and the children we couldn’t communicate because we couldn’t speak english and they couldn’t speak hungarian. my aunt spoke hungarian of course but her children didn’t and i don’t know they started grabbing my doll that they gave me and i didn’t know how to say don’t take it so i just let them have it [laughter]. kate:	you mean you hit him? belzman:	yeah right. and then my dad took us too we stayed in a hotel. i don’t remember how long we stayed there and he found an apartment duplex and we moved there. kate:	how big was that place? belzman:	i think it was two bedrooms. kate:	what about indoor plumbing. did it have indoor--? belzman:	oh yes. kate:	electricity? belzman: 	oh yeah. kate:	were there any things you had never seen before in california? belzman:	gosh i guess--the lights. the neon lights, they weren’t that many like today but it was so--cars we didn’t have cars where i came from and the food was different. kate:	and how did you learn english? belzman:	just picked it up i guess [chuckles]. they sent me to school. kate:	how was it in school did you have --children tease you in school though? belzman:	no, no they were very nice. i had to start from the first grade again cause i couldn’t speak the language and but i guess children learn fast and then my cousins helped some. the teacher would tell them to tell my aunt what to tell me. so but i don’t know all of a sudden i could speak english. only main thing i loved chewing gum. my dad used to give me 10 cents every day. i bought 3 packs of gum those days you could get 3 packages of [laughs] wrigley’s juicy fruit and i would just love that. kate:	then at school people-- you said people were they kind --how were they towards you?  belzman: 	i guess they were nice, i don’t remember anybody-- kate: 	teachers, how did they help you in any way? belzman:	i really don’t remember that part. kate:	what school was this that you were in? belzman:	wilshire crest school on wilshire boulevard. kate:	how did your brother learn english then? belzman:	 i guess the same way, just picked it up? kate:	how about your mother and father? belzman:	well my dad knew how to speak english of course and my mother learned gradually. kate:	at home what did you actually speak in czechoslovakia, did you speak hungarian or? belzman:	we spoke both in europe i mean in when we were there and then when we came to america we just spoke hungarian most of the time. kate:	you mean you spoke jewish and hungarian? belzman:	i never spoke jewish.  kate:	you never spoke jewish at home.  belzman:	no. kate:	so you spoke hungarian belzman:	and czech. kate:	and czech. when you said both i wasn’t quite sure what you meant hungarian and czech when you came here you spoke hungarian. belzman:	aha. only time my parent spoke jewish was if they didn’t want me to know what they talking about. kate:	so your parents did speak.  belzman:	a little. kate:	a little. belzman:	and then they eventually we get so my mother wasn’t so religious [inaudible 00:30:26]. kate:	so what about religious life here in the states did--?  belzman:	we went to temple here in high holidays and she still lit the candles on friday nights. and then gradually we she—we got her away from keeping kosher [chuckles]. kate:	so you abandoned keeping kosher, when then? belzman:	it was a few years after we got there i think. but she still we still celebrated all the holidays.  kate:	who was more religious? were either of your parents more religious? belzman:	my mother  kate:	you mother was more than your father? when you came to california to live what was your father doing for work? belzman:	he was partners with my --he took over my uncle’s business electric business. kate:	is this the uncle who was married to the aunt with five children? belzman: 	yes. kate:	and so when he died, your father took over  belzman:	is that correct? belzman:	yes aha. kate:	and did you stay at that address, that apartment very long? belzman:	trying to remember how long we were there. we had a maid there too. my brother was born there, freddie. then my dad bought a house--i don’t think so maybe a couple of years. then he bought a house kate:	where was that house? belzman:	in los angeles. kate:	same neighborhood? belzman:	no, it was well west adams neighborhood. kate:	west adams belzman:	section, west adams and i’m trying to remember the other street there. but we had a beautiful home and- kate:	how big was the home?  belzman:	two bedrooms, bath, nice kitchen dinette, living room sunken living room. kate:	what was the house made of? belzman:	plaster. kate:	plaster right. and belzman:	it’s still there. kate:	how did your parents, did your grandparents eventually come over? belzman:	no. kate:	so how did your parents adjust to life here in the united states? belzman:	i guess just like any other family we went to school she raised her children of course during the depression my father lost everything. we lost our home and that was rough. and we had to rent, we rented and things never really got really good after that.  kate:	did your parents ever say why they came to the united states? did they discuss any reasons besides knowing someone? belzman:	no. kate:	when they were here did they ever discuss life or anything about going back ever? belzman:	well to visit but not to stay. kate:	so they basically viewed this as their permanent home. belzman:	oh yes.  kate:	how did they think about their original decision to come here at the end of their lives do you think? belzman:	never said much about it, they were glad they were here. kate:	and they never expressed any misgivings about that even during the depression? belzman:	oh not of course then we lost all our family during the holocaust. kate:	back. belzman:	in europe, in hungary. kate:	your grandparents  belzman:	aha kate:	you lost everyone in the holocaust? belzman:	all except one aunt and a cousin. kate:	where, what happened to them? what do you know about them?  belzman:	they were taken away by the germans as far as we know. i do have one aunt. they never want to talk about it. my aunt, she did and my father’s one brother was saved and nephew.  kate:	which brother? the one in france belzman:	no, the one in hungary. the one in france died when he was very young.  him and his bride were- what’s that gas in their room asphyxiated.  kate:	yeah. ann;	but that was years ago but he had another brother that survived the holocaust and my mother had a sister that survived. kate:	how did they survive? belzman:	escaped. well, she was a nurse working in the hospital in and told them she was a jewish i don’t know how she got away with it but she did. kate:	so in that sense they realized it was better being here. belzman:	they just never liked to talk about it. like my cousin i have two cousins in israel now this one aunt’s son and another aunt’s son escaped somehow. but they don’t talk about it too much. they just said it was horrible. but and then i have a cousin in hungary that i just visited and she didn’t talk about it. kate:	and what about yourself how did you feel, how do you now feel when you look back in your life and your parents’ decision to come here? belzman:	oh it was wonderful. kate:	do you think that they had--what were their expectations in first coming here. did they say anything about america to you when you first came?  belzman:	no, just my father was here and this is where we belonged with him.  kate:	and do you think that -- you mentioned some of the obstacles the depression things that happened, do you ever think they ever thought it would be as difficult as you just described when they came? belzman:	no, my father said everything-- of course then we were well off. kate:	then being when?  belzman:	then you know until the depression we weren’t rich but we weren’t what you’d call poor. we had help in the house, we had a beautiful home and thing were real nice. but then my father wasn’t one who could save money. spend it [laughs]. he got it spend it. so during the depression he just lost everything.  kate:	did he ever comment on that, how life was for him?  belzman:	no, but it changed him. he kind of went downhill after that. kate:	any other family tragedies that occurred in the united states after you came here? belzman:	well my brother he died when he was only 42 years old of a heart attack just talked to him, monday morning, monday night he was gone.  kate:	leslie. belzman:	leslie yes. kate:	and where was he living? belzman:	in fullerton. kate:	is there anything that happened in the family? belzman:	no not really everything just you know. kate:	what about your life? could you describe your life i see a mantle i see pictures of family members. kate:	oh well i have three boys, steve the oldest he’s 54, oh my god [laughs] and robert is 50 and rick is 40. kate:	and did you marry, did you marry? belzman:	well, my husband we’ve been married for 55 years. kate:	how did you meet your husband? belzman:	oh, i was working in a dress shop and a girl friend of mine, we used to go to her in-laws and play cards friday nights and my husband was there. he used to be there with all his friends and then he came i remember it was easter sunday.  he came with his friend and his friend came to the door wondered if could go out with him with ted that day. and i said okay, so we went and he saw me every day after that [laughs] and we went together for two and a half years and then finally got married and been married 55 years. kate:	wow. and before then how old were you then when you married? belzman:	21 kate:	so you worked-- belzman:	no, i was a sales lady kate:	sales lady. belzman:	yeah. $5 dollars a week kate:	and did you work after you were married? belzman:	yes, not right away but cause i got pregnant right away and had my son and then i worked part time kate:	and what did you did? belzman:	sales work same people i went back to work. kate:	where was there? belzman:	in los angeles on 41st and broadway and i worked there on and off for almost 30 years  kate:	and what was the place that you worked at? belzman:	a dress shop. kate:	a dress shop that you worked for. belzman:	aha. and during the whites riots they burned it down. so that’s when i didn’t have a job anymore and then i stayed home for a while then i went to work at the airport for a few months. that was a rat race i didn’t like that. and then i got another job and in [inaudible 00:40:42] i stayed with them for 20 years. kate:	doing what?  belzman:	sales work. kate:	seems like you were cut out for sales work. kate:	yeah belzman:	and who were they [inaudible 00:40:09]? belzman:	a boutique. kate:	a boutique. and when you look back at your life now, do you still anyway feel that you are from czechoslovakia, hungary. do you have any identity? did you pass on language to your children? belzman:	no, we didn’t i’m sorry i forgot how to speak hungarian, i speak a little bit but very badly and czech i’ve forgotten completely. kate:	how do you identify yourself now then? belzman:	i say i am hungarian. kate:	and do you consider  belzman:	american but-- kate:	and do you think that your parents’ decision was a sound one to come to this country? belzman:	oh definitely. i don’t think i would be alive today if i we hadn’t come here. kate:	well, i’d like to thank on behalf of ellis island for helping us with your belzman:	oh you’re welcome.  kate:	stories and we’ll send you a copy of  belzman:	oh great. kate:	so this is kate moore signing off on january 27th 1994.  