 janet: 	it’s august the 1st, 1994, and i am here today with pauline riemer who came from austria galicia in 1913 when she was 17 years old. today mrs. riemer is 98 years old and i am here at her home 5prince lane, in westbury, new york.  and i want to say that i am very happy to be here. i am looking forward to hearing everything you have to say. riemer:	 i got a lot to say. janet:	good that’s wonderful but you have to speak english. right? riemer:	 that’s fine. i try my best [laughter]. janet: 	good thank you. ok let’s start by you telling me your birth date? riemer: 	the birth date is october the 28th, i’ll be 98.  janet: 	and what year were you born? riemer: 	1996. janet: 	18? riemer:	 1896 [laughter]. janet: 	yeah right and where were you born? riemer:	 glinelma janet: 	do you know how to spell it?  riemer: 	no. janet: 	could you try to spell it? riemer:	 [unclear 00:01:24]. janet: 	galicia, ok and was it a little town? riemer: 	i came here it was small town, and this is near the big city. took us to go there three hours. the train which you have to go, you have to go to lumberg and out city no train. janet: 	how did you get there? riemer: 	my father took me to lumberg and put me up in other train and go. janet: 	when you were a little girl what do you remember about the little town the village where you were born? riemer: 	i know every corner when you take me there. janet: 	really? riemer: 	every corner. in one day you walk out the whole city. janet: 	what was your house like? what did it look like? riemer: 	we had five children, five maybe six, i don’t remember the how many children. i think when i went away my younger [unclear 00:02:46] my mother was very young. i left her baby i think two years. i was the oldest. janet: 	now tell me your mother’s name? riemer: 	thelma. janet: 	and do you remember her maiden name? riemer: 	maleman what do you mean the second name? janet:	yeah. riemer: 	maleman- janet: 	m-a-r-- riemer: 	l- maleman janet: 	maleman m-a-l. okay and your father’s name? riemer: 	my father’s name was aving. janet: 	aving. and your maiden name? riemer: 	parners janet: 	p-a-r-- riemer:	 n-e-s janet:	 and your sisters and brothers you were the oldest? riemer:	 i was the oldest. janet: 	and who were the other ones. riemer:	the youngest, i brought up four children here from the field, after the second world war. they got married here, two sisters. two sisters got married, and one brother died, the young boy that i buried he died and one got sick and they didn’t let her stay here, and they sent her back before the war. i never heard from her anymore. janet: 	this was someone who came over with you? riemer: 	nobody came with me. janet: 	oh, you came alone. riemer: 	i came all alone. janet: 	ok. well first let’s talk about your family life while you were in your little- riemer: 	my family life is not much to tell, my mother used to sew, and my father was a working man. it was in a poor two roomed house. very poor people.  very poor. i was 10years i was [unclear00:04:55], helped my mother sewing but this country i came because my mother’s sister came two three years before me. she’s not here anymore.  and she got married here and [unclear 00:05:19] had to go to this country, she used to come to our house learn how to sew the machine and she come to america and she sent her mother 5- 10 dollars.  it was a million dollars in europe. i used to say  to my mother, “look, i get older you haven’t got to give me,” in her home, they give you money when you got married, if she got money you get a better husband, if you got less money, you know all of this. “so send me to america i don’t want to be here. you can’t marry me off and i don’t want get married, i want to go to this country.”  [unclear 00:06:07] i used to be such a good house maker and so i make money in europe and the [unclear 00:06:16] they don’t know who even to turn the bill, and they come and they send another one. “i'll send you money' i used to tell her. but my father was in this country-