 janet: 	i see. you went to high school. where were you when you went to high school? where did you go to high school?  saghbazarian: 	where i going to go to school, high school.  janet: 	where were you, in boston? were you in this country?  saghbazarian: 	yeah, college [inaudible 00:00:29] college, yeah.  janet: 	were you a good student?   saghbazarian: 	yeah.  janet: 	what was your favorite subject? what did you like best to learn about?  saghbazarian: 	i don't know.  janet: 	but you could speak turkish and armenian and english?  saghbazarian: 	i talk both of them.  janet: 	who did you speak armenian with? did you speak armenian at home?  saghbazarian: 	armenian, turkish, american, couple of languages.  janet: 	and you became a citizen?  saghbazarian: 	yeah, i writing the president. janet: 	you wrote down the names of the president?  saghbazarian: 	yeah.  janet: 	what makes you feel very proud that you've done in your lifetime? what makes you feel good that you were able to do?  saghbazarian: 	i don't know. i want the- i meet the president and i get the [inaudible 00:02:14] he didn't get when we're back. i met then the president.  janet: 	which president did you meet?  saghbazarian: 	my [inaudible 00:02:25] she didn't give it back. beautiful, i made it.  janet: 	is this the quilt that you made?  saghbazarian: 	yeah.  janet: 	you made it with the presidents on it?  saghbazarian: 	yeah.  janet: 	uh-huh. tell how you got the medal for cooking. who gave you that medal?  saghbazarian: 	big turkish company. janet: 	you mean you were in turkey when you got the medal?  saghbazarian: 	medal, i have.  janet: 	you got that medal when you were in turkey?  saghbazarian: 	yeah, about my cooked.  janet: 	do you remember what you cooked that won you the medal?  saghbazarian: 	i love to cook in restaurant. janet: 	uh-huh. you were the best cook?  saghbazarian: 	yeah.  janet: 	that's something to be proud of.  saghbazarian: 	i teach them.  janet: 	and this was still in turkey before you came here?  saghbazarian: 	uh-huh.  janet: 	do you remember what ship you took when you came to this country?  saghbazarian: 	i like america.  janet: 	why do you like it?  saghbazarian: 	freedom.  janet: 	how is america different from turkey? what was different for you when you came here? saghbazarian: 	you asked me, “how do you come?” janet: 	i'm sorry. say it again?  saghbazarian: 	you say, “how do you come? i say, “we walk.”  janet: 	you walked.  saghbazarian: 	yeah. we walk to come america.  janet: 	you walked until you came to the ship?  saghbazarian: 	yeah.  janet: 	what ship did you take? do you know what ship?  saghbazarian: 	we walk all over.  janet: 	oh when you were in turkey, you walked everywhere?  saghbazarian: 	mmm-hmm.  janet: 	you said before that you like to sing and dance.  saghbazarian: 	what?  janet: 	you said before you like to sing.  saghbazarian: 	[inaudible 00:04:44]. janet: 	can you think of any other songs that you liked? maybe you could sing one?  saghbazarian: 	there in the new york.  janet: 	you landed in new york?  saghbazarian: 	mmm-hmm.  janet: 	and then you went to ellis island? did you stay at ellis island?  saghbazarian: 	we didn't stay long at ellis island. we came to new york.  janet: 	what happened at ellis island?  saghbazarian: 	we came here.  janet: 	did you get examined by a doctor?  saghbazarian: 	we like it here.  janet: 	yeah, you like it here. when you were at ellis island, did a doctor examine you?  saghbazarian: 	yeah, best one.  janet: 	did you eat anything at ellis island?  saghbazarian: 	no.  janet: 	did you sleep at ellis island?  saghbazarian: 	don’t ask me. janet: 	don't ask you? okay. so you had a husband and a son?  saghbazarian: 	what.  janet: 	you had a husband and a son, one son? saghbazarian: 	my son, they going to school, yeah.  janet: 	and your son's name?  saghbazarian: 	mmmm?  janet: 	what's your son's name? and you have grandchildren?  saghbazarian: 	yeah. new york.  janet: 	in new york?  saghbazarian: 	they live in new york. my daughter is in new york.  janet: 	your daughter?  saghbazarian: 	yeah.  janet: 	so you have a daughter and a son?  saghbazarian: 	yeah, my daughter [inaudible 00:07:03]. they lived in new york.  janet: 	did you ever go to new york?  saghbazarian: 	i don't like it.  janet: 	you don't like it? where do you like it?  saghbazarian: 	boston.  janet: 	boston. uh-huh. saghbazarian: 	i'm used to it.  janet: 	you're used to it because you lived here ever since you came to this country.  saghbazarian: 	i work it.  janet: 	where did you work?  saghbazarian: 	[inaudible 00:07:33] 40 years. janet: 	40 years?  saghbazarian: 	yeah.  janet: 	it's a long time. did you like your work?  saghbazarian: 	time is come you like it.  janet: 	would you like to sing a song, a song that you remember that you particularly liked?  saghbazarian: 	sometimes i sing when i work, you know.  janet: 	can you remember some song you used to sing when you worked?  saghbazarian: 	[sings]. janet: 	it seems like you're getting tired so maybe tomorrow morning i'm coming back and i'll see if you feel like talking a little bit tomorrow morning. would that be alright?  saghbazarian: 	alright.  janet: 	okay. thank you. we're going to sign off for the time being and this is janet levine for the national park service and we're going to see if we can resume tomorrow which is november 11, 1995. 