 janet: 	this is august 3rd 1994 and i am in massapequa long island, new york with skolnik skolnik who came from poland in 1921 when she was 20 years old and you came through ellis island then and you stayed there for a few days.  this is janet levine for the national park service and i see you have a lot to say. so we will start at the beginning in poland and then we will go right through what happened in your life. first let’s start of you tell me your birth date? the date you were born? skolnik: 	i don’t know the exact date. janet: 	i have here on this questionnaire march 15th 1901. skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	that is when- now where in poland were you born? skolnik: 	kletsk janet: 	do you know how to spell it? skolnik: 	k- i don’t know how to spell this. janet: 	ok, did you live in kletsk up until the time when you left for this country? skolnik: 	yeah i was born in kletsk. janet: 	ok tell me about kletsk? was it a big town? was it a small village? was it a big city? skolnik: 	that’s a big city. janet: 	what was your father's name? skolnik: 	[unclear 00:01:34]. janet: 	[unclear 00:01:35] and his last name? skolnik: 	goldberg. janet: 	goldberg that was your maiden name? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	and what was your mother's first name and her maiden name? do you remember? skolnik: 	my mother name bittle but i don’t know the second name. janet: 	the maiden name ok and you had brothers and sisters in poland? skolnik: 	yes i had. janet: 	were you the oldest child? skolnik: 	yes i am the oldest. janet: 	ok and can you tell me your brothers and sisters names that came after you? skolnik: 	me- janet: 	you were born first- skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	who came next? skolnik: 	joe,  janet: 	joe, and then who? i see i think you have this on here. harry? skolnik: 	yeah harry. janet: 	and then tilly,  skolnik: 	tilly yeah. janet: 	willy? skolnik: 	willy. janet: 	molly? skolnik: 	molly. janet:	 and hilda. is that that all your brothers and sisters? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	were you closest to any particular member of the family? skolnik: 	yes i stayed in my uncle louie’s house- janet: 	in this country? skolnik: 	in this country because he took me to work from his house. janet: 	ok but, when you were a little girl and you were growing up in poland. do you remember the house you lived in there? skolnik: 	hou- what? janet: 	the house. janet: 	yeah because my father was a tailor he needed a couple of rooms for feeding-for working. so it wasn’t a bad house. janet: 	so he had a couple of rooms in the house that he used for a shop? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	and did you have grandparents who lived around where you lived? skolnik: 	yeah. i had a grandparents living further by the border, by the german border. janet: 	did you ever visit them? skolnik: 	yes. i visit then i came to united states. janet: 	oh, but when you were a little girl did you see them? skolnik: 	no. janet: 	no, how about your other set of grandparents? did you see them when you were a little girl? skolnik: 	no i was always busy helping my father. janet: 	i see. what did you do to help your father? skolnik: 	i was sewing. janet: 	oh you were sewing. were you making clothing? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	so you were sewing what men’s clothing? skolnik: 	yeah he gave me the part that had to be done by hand. but he had machines that he works. janet:	so what did you do? what parts had to be done by hand? skolnik: 	there are certain parts you got to base start first. you know what basing means and then it’s all based and you got to go to the presser, you got to the whole thing that has to be finished already. i used to help him. janet: 	did you like doing that? skolnik: 	yes it wasn’t bad. janet: 	and how about other chores around the house? did you have other things that you had to do? skolnik: 	oh in the house, i had to help my aunt. helping she had small children. i helped her. when i was home. janet: 	is this your aunt sarah? which aunt is it? skolnik: 	i came with sarah. janet: 	which aunt was the one you helped take care of her children? skolnik: 	aunt- i don’t know her name. i forgot her name. janet: 	so did you go to school? skolnik: 	yes i went to school. janet: 	and what do you remember about school in poland? skolnik: 	we used to learn polish, russian. janet: 	what did you speak at home? what language did you speak? skolnik: 	well people spoke polish but in our house we spoke jewish. janet: 	and were you a religious family? did you observe religious occasion?- skolnik: 	yes. my father was religious. he went scheol and friday we parked up everything and saturday we didn’t work. janet: 	and what did you do on saturday? skolnik: 	we prepared something’s for the next shipment that he made. janet: 	do you remember any religious occasions like ceremonies or anything? when you were there that you did? skolnik: 	yeah the pollack’s they likes to be happy with that because they like the polish is really there, it belongs to them. so they were always coming in and they give my father some work to do. janet: 	do the polish people get along well with the jewish people who were living there? skolnik: 	yeah, they were very happy with us. janet: 	so let’s see getting back to school again. what did you like- skolnik: 	first i had to learn from the beginning, then in some school, i had to go to night school because i couldn’t go in the day time already i was busy working. janet: 	how old were you when you went to night school? skolnik: 	maybe 21. janet: 	well that means you were already here, in this country? skolnik: 	yes. janet: 	but i am still talking about when you were like in poland. you went to day school there? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	and how long did you stay in school? skolnik: 	how long about two years. then my father needs help so i had to come home and do the help that he couldn’t get.  janet: 	did your sisters and brothers help him too? skolnik: 	yeah they were younger. they couldn’t help so much. janet: 	and did your mother help him? skolnik: 	my mother couldn’t help. janet: 	she was busy with the other children- skolnik: 	with all of it. she was cooking she was shopping. janet: 	do you remember any foods any kinds of meals or any kinds of dishes that your mother made that you remember that you really liked? skolnik: 	yeah. we liked [unclear 00:09:22]-you know what it is? it’s special. the day- janet: 	say that again? skolnik: 	[unclear 00:09:27] and we liked it. so she made it friday and we put it in the stove and stayed overnight and then on saturday we ate it. janet: 	what was it? what was in there? skolnik: 	meat, and potatoes and good pieces of [unclear 00:09:50] you know. well my mother was a good cook. so she cooked very good but she didn’t have time. she had to go see her parents who lived near the border. near the german border so she went very often. janet: 	she went all by herself? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	did your mother bake bread? skolnik: 	we baked all kinds of rolls, bread, then if cuts so short and bread to buy, so she baked more we should have for the week.  janet: 	do you remember the kitchen of your house? do you remember the stove your mother had to use for baking? skolnik: 	no. we had to bring it to baker. janet: 	so your mother would roll it out? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	in the house? skolnik: 	in the house and we put it on plates, and then put it in to bake. janet: 	i see. so your mother would roll out all the bread for the week, take it to the baker? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	any other food that you really liked when you were little? skolnik: 	we eat a lot of potatoes there [laughter]. janet: 	how about dessert or sweets? did you have anything like that? skolnik: 	yeah we could buy it. whoever had money bought it the sweets. there is a lot of stores there. they have chocolate boxes whole boxes. they have everything. it was after the war so right away they brought in good food. janet: 	i see. do you remember the war at all? the first world war when you were in poland? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	what do you remember? what was your experience of the war? skolnik: 	yes sometimes they used to get very busy in the streets and people were afraid to walk. so everybody went home. janet: 	and you would just stay at home? skolnik: 	stayed a while. a day or two and then we start again. janet: 	did you ever see soldiers? skolnik: 	oh yeah plenty. a lot of soldiers came in from germany in the event a big city warsaw. from germany they walked and that time was a hitler. you remember [laughter]? janet: 	and this now was the first world war right and the soldiers where coming from germany, right? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	and you saw them in your town? in your city? skolnik: 	they go through the town to warsaw. janet: 	i see and how did they act? what do you remember of the soldiers, you personally, what you saw? skolnik: 	the soldiers were they couldn’t out from there line they had to go with the other where they had to go. so they walked, i don’t know where they changed on the way, another way to go. they went with a lot of planes too and they used to go with planes and throw bombs to german. janet: 	and did you ever see a bomb where a bomb had been found? skolnik: 	i didn’t see it because that time we didn’t go out in the streets we were all hidden. janet:	 and so the soldiers would match through the town and you would go and hide until they were gone? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	were people very frightened at that time? skolnik: 	that’s right. they are afraid of course we didn’t know them and they came in with such a splashed up. we had to hide. janet: 	how about the boys in the town where they going into the army? skolnik: 	they took them. they didn’t ask. they took all boys that belong to the army, the age, they took them in. janet: 	when they went through the town they took them? skolnik: 	yeah. they had a lot of noise when they came in. they cleaned up all the stores and the food and they left nothing. janet: 	did they break into people’s houses? skolnik: 	well that i don’t remember. janet: 	but hey broke into stores and they just took what they wanted? skolnik: 	the stores they took some from the stores. janet: 	ok. let’s see. how about-do you remember any happy times? when you were a little girl? skolnik: 	i didn’t have a chance to be happy or not happy. i had to go to work, and right away we were thinking about going to the united states and i had right letters to my aunt in cleveland [unclear 00:15:32] she sends in tickets, and i went with her sister and i went and my grandmother went. we went to cleveland. janet: 	do you remember what you knew about the united states? why did you want to go there? skolnik: 	there was a country that it’s not like you would get a job, and live on it you got to be pushing-finished. they don’t give anybody to work there. you got to be a specialist. positive thought. janet: 	so you thought you could find work in the united states and it would be easy? skolnik: 	that’s what i thought. my uncle had a shop. janet: 	so you are the one who wrote to your aunt sylvia? skolnik: 	yeah.  janet: 	and then she wrote back and she sent tickets? skolnik: 	yeah janet: 	ok so do you remember packing up to go? skolnik: 	oh yeah. you were packing. you were rushing out to go fast as we can. janet: 	you wanted to get out of there? skolnik: 	yes. janet: 	and do you remember anything that you or your grandmother or anybody else took with them? that they packed up to take to this country? skolnik: 	no we didn’t take much. everyone had a satchel and packed up a few things and we went. janet: 	and do you remember saying goodbye to people that you knew? skolnik: 	my father he was right away sorry that i leave. janet: 	he didn’t want you to go? skolnik: 	no but i didn’t want to stay more. i was afraid of the soldiers. janet: 	do you remember actually physically leaving? how did you leave your town? your city? what kind of transportation did you take? skolnik: 	well, they had bridges to go through. they had communication, they had i don’t know i don’t remember- janet: 	did you go on a horse and wagon, did you go on foot, and on train how did you leave your town? skolnik: 	the town? we had to go by train to warsaw and get visas. so that time we came. janet: 	ok so, why was it decided that your grandmother would go? why did your grandmother go with you? skolnik: 	i don’t know why. i don’t know the reason. i think they wanted to see who is going. we came to warsaw we went to the counsel. so we had explain, this is my grandmother she is helen, this is sarah and this way we got the visas. janet: 	so it was the three of you? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	sarah your aunt, and your grandmother and you? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	so did you have to stay in warsaw? skolnik: 	yes we stayed because the counsel was very busy couldn’t take everybody. so it gave us a date to stay. so we stayed. maybe a week in warsaw. janet: 	was that the first time you had ever been to warsaw? skolnik: 	no i don’t have other companies. my aunt sarah, then [unclear 00:19:45] then my grandmother. three people we had. janet: 	what was it like staying in warsaw? do you remember what it was like in warsaw? was that different for you? skolnik: 	oh it was like you go out of here and fifth avenue. beautiful stores and everything. janet: 	so how did you feel about leaving? skolnik: 	oh i had to go because if not i will lose a chance. my aunt wanted us to come. janet: 	so then you got your visas and then what? skolnik: 	then we came home and packed up and then packed to go to get to the united states. janet: 	and where did you go to? then? skolnik: 	we went to-no when you go to the united states you got to go another way. so we went to warsaw, then we passed- what was it, not england.- janet: 	to amsterdam to holland? skolnik: 	holland. janet: 	and you took a train? did you take a train? skolnik: 	yes, we ride in train too but right away they finish the war, so they had a lot of chance to ship the soldier’s home. so we couldn’t go we stayed in that place rotterdam. janet: 	rotterdam? skolnik: 	yeah, we stay there about a month. they shipped the soldier’s home. they gave us food to stay and they told us after they be through with the soldiers we get visa. janet: 	so then the war was over? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	do you remember when you knew that the war was over- skolnik: 	i remember you wear a [unclear 00:20:04]. you don’t know about it? janet: 	yeah, do you remember how people acted when the war was over? do you remember that? skolnik: 	well, some days we couldn’t go out in the streets. we were afraid to go out but they put him in jail so that’s stopped. janet: 	ok so tell me about your experience that month, you were a whole month in rotterdam? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	what was it like for you? skolnik: 	they were nice people. they gave us food best. they got such good food. janet: 	and did you have examinations before you got in on the ship? skolnik: 	yes you got to be examined. sure. janet: 	and what was the name of the ship you finally got to come here? skolnik: 	i don’t remember the ship. janet: 	the windham skolnik: 	the windham. janet: 	now was that like tell me about your voyage on the ship? skolnik: 	the ship. well i am not a big rider. when i ride i don’t feel good. my grandmother was the best writer. she had everything and she was glad she goes to see her children and this was her pleasure.  janet: 	were you in steerage. were you down at the bottom of the boat? skolnik: 	no we weren’t in the bottom. janet: 	you weren’t? what kind of accommodations did you have on the boat? skolnik: 	good. they shipped us in with food and to the time we eat. to the clock we had lunch. later they gave us pieces. they gave fruit. they were very nice people. janet: 	so how did you enjoy the voyage?  skolnik: 	i am not a big rider when i ride i get sick. janet:	 so you were sick on the ship? skolnik: 	yeah, i was sea sick. janet: 	do you remember when the windham came into the new york harbor? remember when the ship came into new york? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	what did-what was-? skolnik: 	we were waiting my uncle louie goldberg he should come pick us up, so we waited. and he came picked us up and we went to his house. janet: 	i see. tell me what ellis island was like? can you describe it? skolnik: 	ellis island you see when you see the pictures when it shows, this is ellis island [laughter]. janet: 	did you see that on the boat? when you first came in? skolnik: 	yeah janet: 	and what was the big building like where you had to stay until your uncle louie came? skolnik: 	it was a building that soldiers go through. they took it over because they had a lot of soldiers coming home from the war. so they went to this building. and then was quiet and i was waiting with my grandmother and my aunt sarah and we waited for the time that we could go. janet: 	how come you had to stay a few days? why did you have to stay? skolnik: 	because it was just the end of the war. janet: 	oh because there was so army soldiers going through- skolnik: 	they shipped first the soldiers’ home. janet:	i see. so they did your uncle louie come to ellis island to meet you? skolnik: 	yeah. he took us to ellis island and then from ellis island we went to his house. janet: 	and did you know your uncle louie? skolnik: 	i remember him because he used to work for my father. janet: 	what was it like seeing him at ellis island? skolnik: 	he was a good man. he did everything. he made the papers, he soon as he could fix us come up we should go, and we went. janet: 	so your uncle louie came and he took you to his house? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	and where was this house? skolnik: 	9th street. janet: 	in the lower east side? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	remember what struck you? the first you were here, the first few days or weeks what struck you as very different in this country? skolnik: 	i didn’t go-you sit here if you want to go, sit outside on the steps and relax. he didn’t want me to go alone. i shouldn’t lose my way home. janet: 	and what did your uncle louie do? skolnik: 	oh he did everything. he made the papers he was-he and my aunt sylvia from cleveland, she did a lot. she send us money to go to buy things what they needed and then we should be able to come. janet: 	what was your uncle louie doing for work when you were staying with him? skolnik: 	he stayed with my uncle raybon had a shop. making clothes. woman’s clothes suits. so uncle louie was already working for him. janet: 	i see. and then was the shop in the lower east side? skolnik: 	no it was in around 14th street, a little higher up. janet: 	so you stayed around the house at first, and then did you start to work or? skolnik: 	then i rest up and then he says. “you want to come up see the shop?” “yes i want to.” so when i came  up, they didn’t let me go home already. they packed me up with work. janet: 	they started you working in the shop? skolnik: 	yeah janet: 	and how about your aunt sarah, what did she do? skolnik: 	she didn’t have any trade so right away she met somebody there and she got married. didn’t take long she got married and she moved out of my uncle louie’s house. janet: 	and how about your grandmother? how did she like being in this country? skolnik: 	the grandmother went to cleveland. to the daughter. janet: 	to the daughter. so you went every day to the shop to work? skolnik: 	yeah, every day. as long as the season lasted, sometimes we stopped working then we turn off work. then we went home and cleaned our own house. janet: 	i see. how is working for your uncle compared with working for your father? how did you like working for you uncle- skolnik: 	my uncle was a designer. he even make the designs and he gave out to sew to the operators. he had a lot of machines working. janet: 	so he had other people working there too? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	and how did you like working there? skolnik: 	it was nice it better than to work in poland for little nothing. here the unions started that time to pick up so that you shouldn’t fool the people. so that was better. janet: 	so what did you do for a social life? did you go to a social club?- skolnik: 	clubs we got at the end of the week. you know we had time, we went for dancing for talking and that’s the time we enjoyed but working was hard. was very hard. janet: 	so were there a lot of people in poland who lived near your uncle who worked for him? skolnik: 	my uncle lived early that time. long time in the united states. janet: 	but were there other people who had come to this country that you saw? skolnik: 	yeah but the people had to wait till they brought all of the soldier’s home then they get in the boat to go. janet: 	how about learning english? do you remember what it was like for you learning english? skolnik: 	yeah i had to go to school. janet: 	at night you went? skolnik: 	night school. janet: 	ok tell me what night school was like? skolnik: 	it’s good. nice schools. a teacher she makes signs. this way she gave us a chance to know the abc and we stay there may be a half a year and then we learned the english. janet: 	good and then did you become a citizen? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	do you remember that? did you take classes for that too? skolnik: 	i didn’t have to take classes. janet: 	no, so how long did you stay living with your uncle? skolnik: 	oh my, maybe three months.  janet: 	and then what? skolnik: 	because they want me to take to cleveland where my aunt lives, but i didn’t want to go there. the shops are in new york. it better to stay in new york. so i stayed with my uncle louie. janet: 	and when you moved out where did you go? when you moved out of your uncle louie’s house? skolnik: 	i moved to the bronx from the city to the bronx. there i have some people that i knew then from the shop. so i ordered them if they can put me in a room. so i stayed with them. nice people. janet: 	how come you left your uncle's house? skolnik: 	my uncle was moving out already from downtown. he moved some place in the bronx. janet: 	so did you continue working for your uncle? after you moved to the bronx. skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	then when did you meet your husband? skolnik: 	my husband? i don’t know because he comes from the same city that i come. his mother used to come every time to find out my mother had that [unclear 00:34:46] so my mother had to save he showed her that they were alright. janet: 	so how did you meet your husband? skolnik: 	my husband i meet, in the shop. janet: 	and did you like each other right away? skolnik: 	not right away it took time. i went to school and he  didn’t want to go to school. he wanted to work that’s all. janet: 	so then you started seeing him? skolnik: 	then he wanted to go, to school but he said he will lose money if he goes to school, we wouldn’t be able to hold up for the people. we should eat. so he went whenever he wanted. he always got jobs. janet: 	so he was also- skolnik: 	he was a tailor.  janet: 	ok, so then when you got married did you live in the bronx? skolnik: 	awhile only. janet: 	and what are your children's names? skolnik: 	my children? here they are [laughter]. janet: 	how many children did you have? skolnik: 	i didn’t have too many children. that’s my children. this is my daughter in law. janet: 	let’s see. did you continue working? when did you stop working? skolnik: 	when did i stop? maybe two years later when we had a store and i was too tired to work so he was starting to get better with his- he made designs he made-he was a good tailor. so he got in a lot of work for me. janet: 	so you said that was enough?  skolnik: 	yes janet: 	and then you stayed home? skolnik: 	i stayed home a while. but i still went to the school and then to him to help. he didn’t want to go to school. yeah that’s right. janet: 	so did he learn english stuff?  skolnik: 	yeah. we learn english. you got to talk right away to customer. so you got go to school first. janet: 	so what do you feel very proud of that you did in your lifetime? what makes you feel proud? skolnik: 	proud. the best thing we leave, we came to the united states. janet: 	do you think it made a difference that you started out in poland and lived for 20 years there and then came to this country? do you think that had a big effect on you? skolnik: 	no i liked it here. janet: 	you liked it from the very beginning? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	did you ever want to go back? skolnik: 	no. janet:	so then once you were here, did any of your other-the rest of your family come over? skolnik: 	yeah whatever. two brothers came. joe and harry. what others? who else. molly wasn’t even born, i had another sister. janet: 	so were you helpful in having your brothers come over here. skolnik: 	yes we had to help. my aunt from cleveland, she sent them tickets and i sent the rest of the money. janet: 	so did you ever go to cleveland? skolnik: 	i wasn’t. maybe once i was in cleveland. janet: 	is there anything else you remember about when you were getting settled in this country and living in this country? is there anything else that you like about being here? skolnik: 	i liked it right away because that time was going on with war and we came here it was nice and quiet.  janet: 	ok i am going to pause here for a second. ok we are resuming again. so you mentioned that you stopped working at one point and then you had a child? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	and what was your child's name? skolnik: 	[unclear 00:40:44]. janet: 	now you have grandchildren? skolnik: 	yeah janet: 	how many grandchildren do you have? skolnik: 	you see them. janet: 	two? skolnik: 	no she got one more. janet: 	you got one more. that isn’t here? skolnik: 	four of them. janet: 	great. so then you went back to working even though you said it was enough. skolnik: 	yeah. i had to go back. janet: 	ok is there anything else you could think of that has to do with coming to this country? did you ever go back to poland? skolnik: 	no, my husband went. he was want somebody’s home. so we went to germany from germany the mother came and they meet. he went back to the united states. janet: 	you didn’t want to go with him? skolnik: 	no they didn’t want to go, they lived in cleveland. they still live in cleveland my family. janet: 	after you son was born, then you traveled a little bit? skolnik:	we had to go because he wanted to live in mexico.  janet: 	what was that like going there? skolnik: 	well, it was a nice place and stay up late and stay out and enjoy yourself and go back home to poland. janet: 	so when you were living in brooklyn, you traveled then to california and mexico? skolnik: 	i didn’t live in brooklyn did i? yeah i forgot. janet: 	that’s ok. skolnik: 	it’s a long time [laughter]. janet:  	long time ago. [laughter] what would you say has given you a lot of pleasure since you came to this country? skolnik: 	we had the peace of mind. because there was fighting. the germans were rough for the people. just plenty trouble. but when i left kletsk. it was getting better that time already. i sent for my father. janet: 	you sent for your father to come to this country? skolnik: 	yeah. janet: 	and he came? skolnik: 	he came. janet: 	and how did he like it here. skolnik: 	no, he wanted to work for his brother. same shop where i worked, he we work there. janet: 	and did your mother come here too? skolnik: 	yes.  janet: 	how did your mother and father like it in the country? skolnik: 	they liked it. janet: 	so they stayed here? skolnik: 	yes. janet: 	ok is there anything else you can think of that you remember from the time you were a little girl in poland? when you think of poland now, what do you think of? skolnik: 	it’s not a bad country but that time was war time. everything was mixed up. janet: 	and how about this phase in your life? in your old age how do you like this time in your life? skolnik: 	it’s very nice. it’s good to live here. it’s better than poland. poland it’s only the rich people lived good but he middle class work hard and they got nothing. janet: 	ok i think we'll stop here. i want to thank you very much. skolnik: 	thank you for taking me for this year to remind myself. janet: 	you did great. ok i have been talking with skolnik skolnik and we are here in massapequa long island, new york. and its august 3rd 1994. skolnik is let’s see, you must be 93 now? skolnik: 	i don’t know my age. 93 yes. janet: 	you are 93 years old yeah. ok we are here with two of skolnik's grandchildren. and her daughter in law. and this is janet levine for the national park service. and i am signing off. thank you very much. skolnik: 	thank you.