 elisa: 	good afternoon? this is elisa madsen for the national park service. today is the 12th of september 1994 and i am in the home of mr. emanuel stern. we are california. we are in hollywood, california. stern: 	no, beverly hills california. elisa: 	no, beverly hills california. mr. stern came through ellis island in 1920, when he was three years old for poland. mr. stern, why don’t you begin by giving me your full name and your date of birth? stern: 	full name is emanuel j stands for joshua stern. date of birth is september 19th 1916. elisa:	can you spell your last name for me? stern:	yes. s-t-e-r-n.  elisa: 	where were you born? stern: 	i was born in the place- i don’t know if i can get the pronunciation correct, we call nawatanwiecz. i am just going to say it don’t ask me to spell it but to the best of my knowledge i think its spelt n-a-w-a-t-a-n-w-i-e-c-z.  i get guess all polish and russian words end with cz. elisa:	do you anything about the size of this town and what it looked like? stern:	 yes to the best of my knowledge, it would-it reminds me- the talking about it reminds me of the town that i was stationed in when i took my basic training in the army. when the train came in my wife had come to visit me and she was leaving the locomotive and the caboose were both out of town.  so you can get an idea of the size of the town. it probably was like a one horse or two horse town. it was a very small village actually from what i heard and my parents had some chickens, they had a cow and my father used to occasionally buy a calf or something and kill and sell the meat.  and also he used to go into the woods and he would work with lumbar men selling trees and selling the wood and i guess that’s how they irked out a living. elisa: 	do you remember anything or have you been told anything about what your house looked like? stern: 	yes i remember very clearly a little girl, polish girl who was supposedly my age that i used it play with and we [unclear 00:02:36] i guess you could call them grasshoppers. they would sort of stick to your finger. and i remember trying to make pets out of them. that’s the only memory i have of ever trying to get a pet and i suppose it was in my genes because all of my children were very much interested in animals and all had dogs. we had a dog. i can faintly remember just running around the house barefoot. elisa: 	what was it made of? do you remember? stern: 	wood, very faintly i can remember a coal stove-a wood stove, they didn’t have coal. a wood stove in the house and that’s about all. elisa: 	plumbing inside? stern: 	i am sure, no. elisa: 	what was your father's name? stern: 	his name was isaac. i-s-a-a-c stern. my mother’s name was rebecca. elisa: 	and what was her maiden name? stern: 	trenk t-r-e-n-k. and also some of the family went on as frank f-r-a-n-k. so both the name trenk and frank were my maternal side. now from my paternal side, to the best of my knowledge my father had no brothers and my grandfather had no brothers. so would be pretty far removed to find any sterns that are blood relatives. elisa:	okay, can you describe what your father looked like for me? stern:	he was a man of about 5'7 or 5’8, slim, very well kept, he had a beard. i always remember of course from late years very meticulous in his dress, extremely meticulous. if there was a slightest stain or anything he wouldn’t touch it and my mum the same way.  growing up we were always bugged, that everything had to be clean. things which i remember as i was grew up. they could be no dirty dishes left in the morning in the sink [unclear 00:05:02] my father sat in or my mother sat in that was parental respect. we could never talk to our parent. yet there was a tremendous amount of love from both my parents. i probably was spoilt because i was the youngest in the family. elisa:	is there any story that you remember from your childhood that sticks out in your mind? you and your father? stern: 	i remember coming from east side of new york and i was exposed to a lot of rough kids. all of us were potential juvenile delinquents. we were brought up-i mean if you look back into america history the lower east side of new york was the home of the mafia the gangs and all that.  so our upbringing was very strict but i know that once a week like clockwork every friday my dad would take me to a bath house where he would scrub the daylight out of me to really get a good hot scrubbing and i went into a steam room then we went into a pool and then some more baths. and then we go out and he would buy me for two cents-i remember this very clearly because then i was old already-a glass, or what they called an egg cream. it consisted some chocolate syrup, little milk and fizz water and that was sort of a treat and periodically we would get new clothes but both my parents we really bug about cleanliness. elisa: 	what did your mother look like?  stern:	to me she always looked like a very old person. somehow i guess having that many children working. she worked with my father. and- elisa:	what was the occupation? stern: 	they had a butcher shop and she used to pluck the chickens and clean them and my dad with the meats. and all of the monies in the house that came in had to go-the first thing was for the children's education. we all had to have college education, we all had to study whether we liked it or not and it was just part of our upbringing. elisa:	is there a story that you associate with your mother? stern:	my mum, yes i remember as a little child always sitting in her lap. her always babying me because i was a baby. every day there was some expression of love and attachment which i sort of carry on to more to my grandchildren than to my children. elisa:	 name for me all your brothers and sister? stern: 	alright i had just one brother. his name was mordecai m-o-r-d-e-c-a-i-. then my oldest sister was ida. then i had a sister rose then a sister anna. sister francis, sister pearl and jenny.  elisa: 	what a large family? stern:	 it was a large family yeah. elisa: 	now was your brother next in line and then you? stern: 	no, the lineage was something like this if i can remember. ida was the oldest, then was rose, then was anna, then was my brother mordecai, then francis, then helen, pearl, jenny and i.  jenny was not well. she was mental retarded. the others were very good. my sister pearl died young, she died in childbirth left one child, a son. he lives in jersey. the other boys, two boys and one girl- elisa:	now did everyone come over together? stern:	no. ida and rose came first. they brought the rest of the family over and i will just try and give you a quick history of them. ida has two boys and a daughter. mari lives in florida, leo lives in arizona. he joined the marines. the reason i tell you this-every, almost all the males in my family joined the army.  rose has two children. hull and augusta.  augusta lives in new york, hull lives in california. hull was in the army in fact he was with me in the civil corp. then anna, anna had two children, aving, who was petain’s army, was killed in verdun and barbra she lives in maryland. then francis.  francis had two children jerry and judy. judy died young of leukemia, jerry was in the army. he did not go overseas. then that was my sister francis. now let’s see.  the next one helen had-pearl had one son, has one son arnold. he was in the korean war. helen had two daughters. no boys so they didn’t serve in the army. jenny never had any children. my brother has two sons-two children. a boy and a girl. the boy was too young to go in the army and a daughter and that’s it.  i in turn, have three sons, larry, buddy-his name is william we call him buddy- and alan. larry is an attorney, he graduated from buckley, and got his law degree from the catholic school here-blew the name. elisa: 	that’s ok. stern:	let’s see buddy, graduated from mit and then graduated from mt sinai medical school. he is a doctor in silver spring. alan my youngest graduated from ucla and got a master’s from northridge. he is a cpa. i myself graduated from st. johns. i have a doctor’s degree in dr. jury barnes law degree and my wife went to nwy. though the last year she got married she got a- 