 janet: 	today is july 22nd. what’s that buzz, do you know? burtt: 	there was the car outside. janet: 	no. burtt: 	i heard it. janet: 	okay, today is july 22nd, 1995 and i'm here in east lexington visiting with mrs. burtt burtt who came from sweden when she was 15 years in 1926. i've also interviewed mrs. burtt's brother herbert melkwest and so he is in the oral history collection at ellis island.  today mrs. burtt is 85 years old, at the time of the interview and i want to say that i'm looking forward because i know you have a good memory, so you probably remember everything. if you would say for the tape mrs. burtt your birth date and where in sweden you were born. burtt: 	i was born saturday night at 7o'clock, 1909 in lysekil sweden. leyskil is a city that is in bohuslan on the west coast of sweden near gothenburg. janet: 	and did you live in lysekil up until the time you left sweden to come to this country? burtt: 	yes. janet: 	what are your earliest memories? burtt: 	just going to school and i don't remember my father because he was here, so we lived for eight years with my mother working and we were taken care of us all. i had two brothers gerstein, herb and myself and i had a grandmother- that was my father's mother. she lived next door and she had her eyes on us while my mother was working but my mother didn't go to work until we started the first grade at the age of six. janet: 	how old were you in relation to your brothers? burtt: 	gers was three years older than me because my mother had another baby between and he died then she had me and then she had herb and when herb was 15 months old my father left for america and he was here for eight years then he decided to come back and he stayed in sweden for two years and my mother had another baby after 11 years and that boy died in the second we were here in this country at 21 years old.  then he left again- my father and then my mother said, “this is it.” my brother was getting 19 years old gers and he had to go in the service in sweden so she sent him off to this country and then she decided to sell the house and get a ticket then we all came. the first of may we left sweden, 1926 and we landed in ellis island i guess 10 days afterwards or something like that. janet: 	well before we talk about the trip, do you remember your grandmother? when you think of your grandmother-- burtt: 	oh i had two grandmothers but i didn't think they would be anything to do with-- janet: 	it’s just about your early life. the kinds of things you did within sweden and did you do things with your grandmother? janet: 	yes and my grandmother lived just like upgrade like here from next house and i was five or six years old and i was the only one that come in her house. she had a two room little red house and i was the only one that come in and sweep and dust and then one day she has a little pot belly black stove that heated the room and i lifted the cover and was going to throw the dust from the dust pan into the stove and my apron caught fire and my grandmother grabbed and her great big all long skirt and smothered it so she saved me.  that’s what i remember but she was the only one that let me do anything in that room. i could go up in the summer and i tell grandma, "get out and sit on the rock, and i'll take out your linen and cloth and pillows and have them hang out and air them out, rags and everything." and i loved that, i loved keeping house- cleaning, i loved cleaning.  saturday my mother went to the market to buy, spend the little money she had and meet my aunts at the market and when she was gone i took all the rags out and swept the floor and cleaned up the rooms that we had. we had two big rooms and then two small ones like halls. janet: 	what was your mother doing for work while your father was in america? burtt: 	one time she worked in a brewery to clean bottles and that’s nothing to put on i suppose but mostly from lysekil everybody worked in the herring place, pickle herring canning factory [unclear 00:06:52] and then she worked there but as i said she didn't go to work until three years after my father left so she worked about five years but we were in school from eight to five all day long. janet: 	what was your mother's name? burtt: 	anna. janet: 	and her maiden name? burtt: 	johansson also. janet: 	and how about your father's name? burtt: 	that’s another tricky thing, his father's name was larson and his first was johannes larson and when the children grew up they couldn't use larson, they had to go from his first name so that made a johansson so they were all johansson. janet: 	so you were baptized johansson. burtt: 	johansson. janet: 	then how did melkwest come in to be? burtt: 	my father's brother wrote to the king and changed his name from johansson to melkwest and automatically the whole family got the name melkwest. janet: 	that’s interesting, why did your uncle want to change it? burtt: 	well, they do that all the time you know you can change. every other person was johansson and peterson and swenson and that so and he was in business. my father's brother had a business in lysekil, so he wanted to have a different name i guess. janet: 	did you know that uncle, the uncle that had the business? burtt: 	oh god yes, i stayed with him for three months. my mother had appendix out and it won't heal, so three of us had to be divided, i stayed with that uncle and one was with grandmother and one was with another aunt. herb was with grandma i guess. janet: 	what about the medical care, do you remember anything about the medical care then? burtt: 	oh [chuckle] we never had no. we had no dentist, we had no doctor, we didn't need any because we helped ourselves. janet: 	with what kind of cures, what did people do to take care of illness? do you remember any particulars about how people did their own medicine? burtt: 	no, we had the right food. we lived on fish and herring and macro and my mother used to every sunday in the winter time she got a piece of beef with the bone and she made a big big soup, every sunday she had that, they call it kottsusoppa [laughter] and that was full of vegetables. janet: 	can you spell kottsusoppa? burtt: 	k-o-t-t-s-u-s-o-p-p-a. janet: 	and so would you have that soup on sunday and would you have it later in the week or not? burtt: 	well if there was any left yeah but we had a lot of hamburger and then we had a lot of milk soups. my mother made from milk, in fact macaroni went into the milk soup, that’s the way they cooked it there, mama did. janet: 	what else would be in the milk soup besides macaroni? [crosstalk 00:11:10]. burtt: 	just milk and macaroni and flavoring and sometimes there was a little thickening to make a little body you know but we had a lot of oat meal of course and a lot of pancakes- swedish pancakes we had that and puddings and rice puddings. we had a lot of rice puddings. we ate a lot of rice. janet: 	so during the week you mostly had fish? burtt: 	yeah, fish and hamburger, sometimes i think we had some kind of baloney and of course we had pork chops but it was-- janet: 	that was a special, a special before the meal? burtt: 	no, it wasn't. they were just what we had i mean when my mother bought anything she bought what was there to buy. janet: 	did you ever go with your mother to market outside of herring? burtt: 	not very often, there was one day she wanted to go by herself and visit my aunts because they went down there too then they meet and they might go in and have a cup of coffee and talk and that was one time she didn't want me around but she did take me.  i remember going and it was all boots all over the front of the hotel there, there was an opening and like a plaza and everybody came in from the country with their horse and wagon and set up the boots and sold butter and eggs and everything from the country. vegetables and berries and flours. janet: 	well now were there farms around the town? the farms were around the town, is that where the farmers were? there were no farms in -- burtt: 	no, they were a few miles outside up in the country and they came in and one winter we had a feud, it went long quite a few miles and one winter the farmers came in on a horse and wagon on the ice, we froze so solid that i remember one year everybody was talking about it. farmer came in today with a horse and wagon on the ice. we lived right near the water so we could go and swim everyday on summer. janet: 	what else did you do for fun, for recreation besides swimming? burtt: 	we played house, i went to sweden in 70' and i met my girlfriend after all these years and i visited her and i've been [unclear 00:14:24] and turn out for all those 25 years and she just died at christmas but her and i we played house. janet: 	did you have like a doll house or you just play with [crosstalk 00:14:39]? burtt: 	no, my mother had a wood shed where we had wood but we could never afford wood so we swept that out and cleaned and we got a few little rags and we had box or something and i suppose.  i really don't know what we played anyway. i only had one doll and my mother made it, she had a little head, porcelain head and she had black curly hair, no hair just porcelain. janet: 	[unclear 00:15:25]? burtt: 	yeah, right into the body of the porcelain head and then my mother made a body and the legs and arms. janet: 	what did she make it out of, the body? burtt: 	the cloth and stuffed with cotton and then she made me a little quilt about that size, all velvet colors different- was velvet and of course i had that for years. janet: 	did you have clothing for the doll? did you have different dresses? burtt: 	no, there was only one outfit and that was it [laughter]. don't forget we were very poor because we only lived on what my mother made. during the war we never got a cent from this country, not one cent. janet: 	it couldn't get through then. burtt: 	no, they wouldn't let it come through and there we were during the war- first world war. that was horrible, it was horrible because we had a german queen and she checked every single thing that come in, fish or meat or any- she shipped it off to german.  that was an order from the queen and king and of course my mother went down to the war and how i found that out and remember she asked one fisherman if she can have one fish and he said, "no, that’s going to germany," and then during the bad times my brother had to take [unclear 00:17:12] and walk for miles up to the country and see if we could get a few potatoes or something i can tell you that i never forget as long as i live.  my mother had a stack of magazines that she had bought and journal, the swedish home journal and that came every week and i read that, my mother read it, my grandmother read them then we saved them and when the war started she had a big stack and she had to go up in the attic and we had a black stove with two burners and the [00:17:59] and the oven and we opened that cover, we had no light, we had no candle, no gasoline- kerosene rather and we just ripped off one page at the time and my mother put in the stove and the flames lit up the kitchen.  that’s how we could read or anything by that light coming from the stove with the old journal piece by piece. nobody even remembers that but me, i guess mama remembered, she's gone. we had a tough time during the war and then of course i said to mama, "my god, how did we live through that?" she said, "you don't remember nothing, you were six years old when it first started."  and then after the war we got one light in the kitchen from the ceiling, electricity came in. well, my mother had a sister and a brother. her mother married the second time and they were half-sister and half-brother and they were just a year older than me and my brother gerst and they came and my mother had to go shopping and my brother and his uncle but he was a year younger than him, so anyway they were talking about how you can get a shot and all that kind of stuff in the electricity and they had been talking and so they unscrewed the bulb and thank god that he put the potato peeler with the wooden hands on.  he stuck it up there and everybody was hiding when mama come home, everybody was hiding. she said, "what’s the matter with everybody?" and of course my little brother, he was only four or something you know- herb, he was the smallest and he was the only one that didn't hide, everybody was hiding there someplace and finally he couldn't helped it but he looked and my mother went to snap on the light and there was nothing but he was lucky he ran down the street and there was an electrician and he came right up and he said, "he blew a fuse."  thank god for that, he could have been killed you know but little things like that i remembered, there bad things and good things. then we had a lot of - sometimes you know they would come from another place and they were drunk and they were looking for people and they go in the wrong-- janet: 	during the war? burtt: 	this was later when i was pretty- i don't remember. i was 11 when my father came home and it was either before he came or after. that was before he came because he changed the house when he was there, he rebuild it. the door wasn't very good on the outside and he came and he shook it and he shook and my mother was thinking he was going to break it down because we didn't know who it was. it was a stranger in there.  so he opened the kitchen door and pulled in the big key that was in the kitchen door and shut it and then her and i went and we opened the window a little. we had a window that opened that way and we peeked down and gosh he was awful tall and he had a dark add on him. i said, "thank god he didn't come in." now that was in the late 20s after the war you know. janet: 	now this was just a stranger? burtt: 	yeah, he was looking for another house but he went to the wrong house and of course we were scared but somebody said he was looking for another house. my mother didn't have anybody you know know anybody. janet: 	what was it like for you when your father came home? burtt: 	horrible. janet: 	how come? burtt: 	he didn't know anything about children, he didn't want children. i'm sorry to say it, he didn't know anything about children and herb was nine and i was eleven and my mother let us go out a few minutes at 6 or 7 you know the coast. we didn't dare to ask him if we should go out in coast. one time we lied and we said, "can we go up and sit with grandma for a little while?" and of course we put our winter clothes, we took the sledge, we went down just from here down to there where the other kids were. he happened to go down to the well and got some water and he heard our voices and did we get a -- we never asked to go out again. janet: 	so he was very strict, he didn't let anyone [crosstalk 00:24:26]? burtt: 	he was impossible, he was awful. one time he beat me with a strap and i never forgave him. i couldn't never stand him after then and i hadn't done anything. my brother was a cabin boy on the boat then he went to germany and he brought an accordion and he came home and i said, "can i do it?" and the button fell off, one of the buttons but it wasn't my fault, he said afterwards, he said the button was loose, after i had gotten the beating [laughter]. janet: 	this was your oldest brother who went off [crosstalk 00:25:06]? burtt: 	yeah gerst, he died a few years ago up herring. he was here in maine too. it’s a sad thing i'm telling you and it shouldn't be told. janet: 	well, it’s the way life [crosstalk 00:25:22]. burtt: 	we had a happy childhood just the same. it wasn't bad because my mother never laid her hands on us. we could do exactly what we wanted and i had my cousins to go do and have play with and have a good time and we went picking berries and we went swimming and living. janet: 	where would you go swimming? where would you go? burtt: 	oh god, down the foot of the hill that was the ocean. janet: 	oh you went swimming in the ocean? burtt: 	oh yes, ocean right out. we sat in the window like that and we saw every boat coming up and down the water. that’s why my mother liked tenants harbor so much. she really liked it up there. janet: 	so did you ever go out on boats? burtt: 	only once. yeah my mother's uncle he had a big cigar store, when you get off the train you go right by his store and of course all the farmers went in there, so he was well off, my mother's uncle and he had a motorboat- big one so he took us children and mama on a picnic one time and we rode up the field.  then my mother was born on an island so every time we went to visit her mother we had to go on a boat but there wasn't a privately owned you know there was some [unclear 00:27:14] boat that run that tour and then only once i went with my friends- mira's brother had a boat and they took us out of seven times. janet: 	you remember going to the island to see your mother's family? burtt: 	oh yeah. janet: 	what kind of a place was that? burtt: 	well, it was only one place we couldn't go anywhere else. there was water all around. i stayed with my mother's half-sister one summer for a few days, she took me swimming and then when i was very little i almost got run down with the horse that got wild and he came running and they got me out of the way and in fact when [laughter] i run under a horse one time coming down the hill and somebody got me out of the way twice and i was three years old and my mother sat me on a rock in the water and i fell in, she turned around i was laying under the water [laughter]. there were little things like that. janet: 	yeah, that you remember. there were wild horses around? you said they were wild. burtt: 	they were loose and when they felt like running they ran. janet: 	what was the name of the island, do you remember? burtt: 	malmon, same as there is a city in skane in sweden and that’s malmo. so she was born there but she came to lysekil when she was young and she was a baby sitter for a big bakery man and his wife had so many kids and she was working for them when she met my father here years ago. janet: 	what kind of bread did you have? did you get your bread from a bakery or like your mother make bread? burtt: 	my mother made rye bread every other week or week. janet: 	would she make a lot of those? burtt: 	yeah and we wanted the white bread with [unclear 00:29:55] and we just didn't have the money. we begged and begged if we could go to the bakery and get a round loaf of that but it cost 40cents and that 40cents. janet: 	that was a lot for then. burtt: 	yeah, it would give us the flour and the yeast and everything [laughter] that went into the hold and she had a trough- wooden. janet: 	yeah, trough. burtt: 	about that long and that wide and that’s all that she did was make bread in there and set it and covered it up and then baked the bread but she made bread all the time and she made bread up here in maine but she made it with unsifted rye flour. you can hardly get it today but she got it and everybody in the tenants harbor and brooklyn.  she had many friends. my mother had many friends up here in maine. swedish and norwegian and finish they all liked my mother but she made that and they said, "oh you know i hope we have sandwiches of anna's bread." they all loved that bread, she made very good bread but she wasn't a cake maker at all. janet: 	how about religion, was your family religious at all? did you go to church? burtt: 	i had to be religious. i was forced to it from the teacher in school. he kept a tab on us. my mother never went to church and here of course we never went to church. no, i'm not going down there to them. what did she call it? hypocrites because they come out of there and then they tore everybody down, when they come out of church. janet: 	do you remember any celebration in sweden, any kinds of festivals or celebrations or like when somebody got married, weddings or? burtt: 	no, no weddings. all i remember is funerals [laughter]. janet: 	what do you remember about them in sweden? burtt: 	well, we had two rooms like we had in the house, you set up a table and you had men in one room and women in the other when they came back, either before they went or they come back. janet: 	from the cemetery? burtt: 	and they had coffee and cake and cookies and of course my mother had the both from my grandmother and my father's sister. she died in the spanish flu when she was 29 years old and i remember her well. she was nice but she didn't bother with us either because she worked and she spent money on beautiful clothes and things like that. she lived with grandmother, she never got married. janet: 	did she live with the grandmother that you used to clean the house for? burtt: 	yeah, she lived there. janet: 	did you ever go any place with her or did you ever do things with your aunt, i mean your father's sister? burtt: 	no, i never went any place. i only went to the island with my mother and then one time but my brother he went up to another state or city with my grandmother once. they sent him up there for one summer. they had a farm so he went there but herb and i we never went any place but we had the whole city and any place we want to go. we had a beautiful beautiful spa like where the rich people came. the king came one year. janet: 	to your town? burtt: 	yes, the king of sweden was there one year and they had special box for them and we had a park where they had a beautiful, beautiful orchestra all summer. sitting in the open, anybody could come and listen to them and of course they had this high class opera music or what do you call it? you know there was no jazz and there was -- janet: 	an orchestra? burtt: 	yeah, big orchestra. every summer came to the park and then they had a special one out near the spa where the rich people were sitting out and of course they had outdoors where they can sit and then they had a big hall where they had the dinners and breakfast and my aunt worked there and cooked one year for the summer people. there was all people that came there. janet: 	what was it like living in a country where there was a king and that royal [unclear 00:35:43]? burtt: 	he didn't bother me [laughter]. no, i was going to tell you-- janet: 	did it have to do with the spa? no. burtt: 	i'm trying to see what i was going to say, it was little important and in that park where we could go that was open they had fireworks and they were beautiful when we all looking for fireworks. janet: 	when would they have the fireworks? on what occasions, do you know? burtt: 	mid-summer and the end of june and then they might have another to draw people to come into that because they had another dining room in the hall for people to come in because we never saw it, we didn't have money for that but the young people could go there, the ones that worked. janet: 	was there dancing and that kind of thing? burtt: 	oh god, dancing, three times a week. yeah, i did go for a few dances. oh yeah, that was one time we were six girls and my mother would not let me go because i belonged to the good temperance, you know good temperance is people that don't drink and we were invited out to an island of the same place as my mother came from and so we hired this man.  in fact he came to this country and he was a good friend of my mother’s- him and his wife after that but we're all given money and i didn't get any money because they didn't have it. i got in just the same in the car [chuckle] and he took us to this place, it wasn't far and we danced. there was out in the island like a school house and i went there a few times. janet: 	was it the same kind of dancing that people do here? burtt: 	no, it was waltz. it was the most and then the [unclear 00:38:33]. janet: 	is that a dance? burtt: 	yeah, i had a cousin, she taught me how to do [unclear 00:38:42] when i was 13 and there was [unclear 00:38:44] and then there was of course another one. anyway somehow we couldn't get back with him. janet: 	from the island? burtt: 	yeah, there were a lot of fishermen in that island and they got us and they took us home across the water that wasn't very long but we were all there sitting on the boats and i remember that we got home and we had a long way to run from here to lexington to get up to our houses. so that was excitement enough for a 15 year old. janet:	yeah, now what kind of music would there be when you went to a dance? burtt: 	accordion and violin always. janet: 	was your family musical in anyway? did anybody--? burtt: 	they could have been if they had wanted to but they never seemed to want to. janet: 	well now what do you remember about school, going to school and what was school like for you there? burtt: 	if they had a school like that in this country they could teach the children to read and write. janet: 	what was it like? burtt: 	you'd lined up your class, 28 children. you'd line them up and the teacher stood on the steps and then when she says, "march," then you walked up the steps because there were stairs to go up, underneath there was rooms for cooking for feeding children and then it was classrooms for men to work with the wood and then girls had rooms where they taught to be sewing.  so they had to go up these stairs and on one end of the building, it was the first or second grade and on the other was the higher grades and you marched way then and you know the bench you were going to sit and you know the girl you were sitting next to.  she goes on one side and i go on the other and there we were row after row. you never moved out chair, you never turned around and talked, you sat there and you looked at the slate up there on the wall or whatever you call it and the teacher, he was sitting up there. then last year i was there, i had a man teacher and i hated him. janet: 	why did you hate him? burtt: 	because he insulted me and i couldn't say anything and i never forget anybody insulting me you know. when i think of something i used to go like that and one day he stood looking and of course i was very close to him you know he was up there and i was here and he saw me. janet: 	scratching your head. burtt: 	yeah, i never told my mother this. i never told anybody that he said, "ebba is disturbing the lice." that wasn't a nice thing to say because mama kept us clean. i never forget that. my cousin wanted me to come in and say hello to him when i was there, he was an old man now you know and i said, "i never want to see that man again." janet: 	was he your last teacher, the last teacher you had? burtt: 	yeah, i graduated from him but his wife thought i was the best writer, penmanship in the class. janet: 	was his wife also in the school? burtt: 	no, they lived there. they had an apartment and she had a little baby boy. they had an apartment that you could walk in, not from the classroom but from the steps. janet: 	so it was attached to the stairs? burtt: 	but you had one hour when you came in the morning, you sing hymn and you had one hour of bible class or the bible and we had a catechism and bible history book. two different books and we had one hour of that then they next hour was either reading, writing or arithmetic and then we go home for lunch and we stay two hours and then the next class that he had, the teacher had they came in for two hours from 12 to 2. janet: 	while you were home for lunch. burtt: 	yeah and then they go out from 2 and then we come back from 2 to 5 but every other day was changed. one day i went to school at eight in the morning and the next i went to ten, ten to twelve. 8 to 10 one day, 10 to 12 the next and then back in the afternoon to 5 one day and then other from 2 to 4. it altered because they had no room so they had the classes cramped. janet: 	and the other children would do it the other way around? burtt: 	yeah. janet: 	did you have a lot of teachers? burtt: 	only one. janet: 	only one, so he taught everything. burtt: 	everything, he taught everything. even the woman, we even learnt about electricity. how it didn't mix with water and of course geography. i loved geography, i know every city, every state in europe and when we studied one state, we had to draw a map of that state and align the water, where the water come in. we had really really teaching and we had an hour at each thing we were doing. janet: 	so you got a good education? burtt: 	that’s how i got my beautiful job in [unclear 00:46:13]. i was there for 11 years in the contract's office here in bedford in walton. they got me in on my education from sweden. janet: 	now what grade did you graduate from? what was it? did you go like when you were five or six? burtt: 	you started six and i ended up 13 and then we had to go to the minister and got confirmed. janet: 	that was the usual pattern? burtt: 	yeah. janet: 	you went to school-- burtt: 	yeah and after that you started going to the minister and god knows what we studied there, i don't remember a thing. janet: 	did you go like all day? burtt: 	only once a week with him but then we had to get all dressed up for confirmation. we had to go out to that church twice, one sunday and then the foreign sunday and that stinking [laughter], i shouldn't talk like that. that minister, i hated him too. janet: 	why? burtt: 	he said we have to have black dresses, black dresses in may because we were so poor that we couldn't afford white and all the other classes they had the white dresses, white shoes and white dresses. janet: 	so it was your whole class that he wanted to dress in black? burtt: 	yeah and i couldn't go with my class. i was so young that i couldn't go with my class. janet: 	oh you finished younger? burtt: 	yeah, i was too young he wouldn't take me and my father was home then and he went up and he was fighting with the minister and the minister says, "never mind, she's too young." janet: 	so you didn't get confirmed? burtt: 	oh yeah, i got confirmed but i had to be home for a whole year and that killed my father, it just about killed him that i couldn't get confirmed and go out and work at 13 or 14. janet: 	what was the usual thing? in other words you go through school you graduate, then you go once a week to the classes with the minister and would the girls like work during that time or they wouldn't work until after they were confirmed? how did that work? burtt: 	no, you couldn't get a job until you were past 14. you had to be confirmed before. janet: 	now was everybody lutheran or were there other kinds of [crosstalk 00:49:00]? burtt: 	oh no there was methodist and then there was salvation army. i loved salvation army. janet: 	so how come you liked them? burtt: 	i loved going there on the winter evening and listening and they played and the singing and i liked it and of course it was some place to go. not that i went very often because we went here so soon you know right after. janet: 	what about the provobition? the group that was concerned with not drinking and not smoking, what did you call them before? burtt: 	good temperance, that’s what they call them in this country. janet: 	temperance. burtt: 	temperance, yeah. janet: 	were they active in sweden? burtt: 	well anybody did and if you were drinking you couldn't belong to them. it was like a lodge and you couldn't belong there and they had parties and dances and picnics and all that kind of stuff. janet: 	i see so the only people who belonged to that were people who believed that you shouldn't drink and you shouldn't smoke? burtt: 	yeah and of course i was so young that was the only thing i could belong to. i couldn't belong to anything else because i was too young. janet: 	when you got to this country and your mother was here and you were here, when you used to talk about sweden in the old days and all that, what were the kind of things that you and your mother remembered and talked about that had to do with your life there? burtt: 	only what i have been telling you now i guess. there was nothing good to talk about only suffering [laughter] for my mother. she was so sick when her henry was born that they didn't think she was going on and i was in the next room and he was born the 27th of december and i was 13 and they carried him out and laid him on my arm and i was the first one that held him, so he was with me in this house for one year, went to lexington high then he to the service and never came back. he went in september and was dead in december. that was hard on mama. janet: 	so when your father came back to sweden, did you and your brothers and your mother- did you come back with your father or you came back first? burtt: 	no, two years after. janet: 	two years after. burtt: 	yeah, it was two years and then we came. janet: 	now how come you left him there? burtt: 	he wasn't going to take us over here. janet: 	i see, so your mother decided. burtt: 	yeah. janet: 	what made her decide to come at that point? burtt: 	well my god if you sit and suffer for eight years without a man and then he comes home dressed up with six suits, silk shirts, beautiful clothes, he's giving them all to his brother and he went to america again.  so you know she woke probably, she said, "nothing doing." we had nice little house, she got $4000, that covered our trip. so it was my mother that brought me over here. it’s an awful saying hard feeling, i don't like to have it out in the open but i suppose i'm getting out there now. janet: 	well, it’s the truth and that happened with families. the father often came first and then families broke up and that was part of what happened to people. so in other words your father came back and then your mother decided and your mother sold the house and how did you get from lysekil? burtt: 	yeah, we took a boat to gothenburg and then we went on to stockholm in gothenburg and my mother was so miserable seasick that i don't think she was on the deck at all and herb and i we had to watch henry because he was only two years old. janet: 	so was your older brother with you? burtt: 	he went in march that same year but he went in march early. janet: 	now was he able to send money back to the family when he went? burtt: 	oh no, he had to get adjusted to be in this country and he had to learn to speak english and that i tell you that they talked about this spanish and people that won't learn to speak english. the finnish people up there they didn't want to learn english. janet: 	they wanted to keep the finnish ways. burtt: 	it’s a shame because you're here in this country and you should be able to speak. i don't speak very good. now i got new teeth and it makes it worse [laughter]. janet: 	well, you sound fine to me. okay so what did your brother do, your oldest brother when he came before the family? burtt: 	they all were pave cutters and that’s in the stone quarry but [unclear 00:55:09], they are all over maine, you probably seen this big quarries. they got the block of granite on top of the ground and they stand there by a big round tap. you can see it today if you went to over clark island they still have it but herb didn't want to do that so he went and he worked in a snow ship yard. janet: 	making ships, building? burtt: 	yeah and he went to school up in tenants harbor for a year so he really learnt english language and reading and writing and he learnt blue print so he got a job with scotts paper company and he was with them for years, herb was but he had to go way up to northern part of maine there to work for them. janet: 	where did he learn the blue printing? burtt:  	on his own. janet: 	on his own. burtt: 	you can teach yourself you know, that’s how i have done. janet: 	were the men working with cutting paving stones in sweden as well? burtt: 	my father was and it was so bad there that’s went to this country. janet: 	i see and did your father go to maine? is that where your father was [unclear 00:56:55]? burtt: 	well he had been down on south carolina or north carolina and worked down there. my father made awful good money when he was here right after the first world war. he made good money but i guess he knew how to spend it too. he had a good time, so then he came up to maine to work in the clark island quarry and then he found the house in tenants harbor for us. janet: 	when your mother decided to come, she let him know? burtt: 	oh god yes. janet: 	and then he went to maine? burtt: 	he went down in ellis island, 9 o'clock in the morning of the 10th or 11th, i don't know which because we were up in maine the 14th of may and that i know and so between where the boat landed and ellis island after nine days they said they took us something. they won't let us off. janet: 	why not? burtt: 	well that’s the stupid people that worked there. that’s a very stupid people that worked there, we were healthy and well and they had tested us. janet: 	did they test you before you got on the boat? burtt: 	oh god, you couldn't go if you were [chuckle] - you couldn't leave sweden if there was something matter with you. janet: 	do you remember anything about those tests before you left? burtt: 	we had to have the doctor, no. you have to see the doctor and you look at you and then you go but when you get to ellis island they check you and pass you and my mother and two brothers and me, three of us. we were on one side on a room and my father was on the other side in the same building on the next room from 9 in the morning to 2 in the afternoon.  well, there he was with the wife and kids that couldn't speak english and he had to go and find a place for us and i guess he didn't have enough money to go to the hotel, so he went to swedish church minister and they put us up for the night. so we got [unclear 00:59:32] the next morning to boston and then we went from [unclear 00:59:42] to boston and we took the train to maine and my father took two men and i met them here and after 20 years i met one and got real friendly you know him and his wife that he brought from ellis island to boston. janet: 	[inaudible 01:00:03]. burtt: 	yeah and two of them and i get friendly growing up. i didn't have anything to do with them but we were friends, so i met them at dances and i danced with them after 20 years. janet: 	what else do you remember about ellis island for those hours that you had to stay there? burtt: 	nothing, they wouldn't let us do nothing. janet: 	could you see that your father was there? burtt: 	no, but he told us afterwards and they finally they let us out but all the people they kept them there. there was two girls, they were much older than me, they were in 20s against and one of them got a cough on the way over, she got a little cold, this separated those two girls.  this separated, they let that one go and the other one and you know that was terrible for two girls that couldn't talk english and one was probably going to one neighbor or relation and the other. my mother had a little black suit case about that size and the men come and crossed it you know that it was okay i guess and my little two year brother was-- janet: 	this is tape two now and i'm speaking with burtt burtt on july 21st, 1995 and when we ran out of the tape one, you were talking about your little brother henry who was two years old at ellis island. so maybe could you just repeat that about the suitcase? burtt: 	yeah, we were waiting with the other people on ellis island and we had been there from 9 in the morning and it was 2 o'clock in the afternoon before my father could come in and take us off and my little brother he ran over, he was two years old. he ran over and he wiped that chalk off my mother's suit case three times before the man told my mama, "watch him so he doesn’t take it off anymore [laughter]." and then we came to boston and we got a train. janet: 	do you remember anything about the swedish church was it that you stayed at that first night? burtt: 	no, i don't remember anything about- i was so confused but i know we went some place and they put up us up for the night. janet: 	do you know by any chance there was a swedish seamen home on [crosstalk 01:02:57]? burtt: 	that’s probably where we-- i bet you that’s where he took us because he would never take us to a hotel. janet: 	but you can't remember anything about that night? burtt: 	not a thing, i only remember that we got on a boat from-- janet: 	from new york. burtt: 	from new york to four river. janet: 	four river and then when you landed then you went to tenants harbor? burtt: 	he had rented a house. janet: 	do you know why he went to tenants harbor? burtt: 	yeah, he was working. there was thousand men in that quarry at that time. he couldn't find a place for us so he rented us this awful and miserable place up there in tenants harbor, i guess the house is still standing, it’s next to the [unclear 01:04:01] and then they bought the little house next to there and that’s not really anything you want to hear about. we were there and my mother was pregnant twice there. janet: 	was there a large swedish community there when you first arrived? burtt: 	well as i told you there was thousand men and half of them were swedish. janet: 	half of them were swedish and what else was [crosstalk 01:04:32]? burtt: 	i couldn't go out with them because they were in the 20s and 26 and i was just 16. janet: 	so what did you do? burtt: 	my father got me a job right away and let’s not talk about that. it’s a maid for a doctor's widow in brooklyn and he was very strict i couldn't go out. i could go to movies at 7 and be back at 9. janet: 	so you lived there then? burtt: 	yeah, i had to live there with her. i couldn't go to tenants harbor saturday night if i could get a ride. there was a finish dance on mains street and i could go to that but i couldn't go back to her house 12 o'clock because she was asleep. janet: 	now in 1926, there was swedish people, finnish people, what other groups were coming from europe at that time to tenants harbor? do you remember [crosstalk 01:05:42]? burtt: 	i don't think there was many finns, they were all here. they were all finnish people and the norwegian were here and we were the last family that came i guess from sweden. only this john and viola they came just about the same time but viola still lives up in the nursing home in brooklyn. janet: 	oh yes, i met her. burtt: 	oh you did? janet: 	yes, [unclear 01:06:06]. burtt: 	she was the best friend of my mother. she was nice but they didn't like my father, none of them liked my father. janet: 	was there an italian group of people in tenants harbor in the quarries at that time? burtt: 	no, not that i know of. no, mostly finns and there were some english. janet: 	how were you received as somebody who had just immigrated to this country? how did the town’s people act? were they nice to you, did they call you green horns? burtt: 	they just sit there and laugh at you but i didn't pay any attention. when i came back the first summer i had a bathing suit and i put a coat on me and i walked down to where [unclear 01:07:07]? nellie's sister in law on that road and did you ever hear a whitney wheeler? she came and picked up groceries for my mother for years but of course they were so high and mighty because i couldn't talk to them you know. i had to come down to boston to learn to read and write. janet: 	really, what did you do? how did you [unclear 01:07:44]? burtt: 	i met two norwegians girls and they worked the same place with me, we worked here on belmont hill school, private school all of us. janet: 	so you three came down from maine? burtt: 	no, they were born here in mattapan, the norwegians girls and i met them but they were my age and they both- every night when we didn't have anything to do we went out for a walk and things but they taught me how to read and write. janet: 	so how did you happen to leave maine and come down this way? burtt: 	my god working for $5 a week, at least down here i got room and boarding $12 and then of course i was only here 2 years and i got married. janet: 	in massachusetts were you when you got married? burtt: 	yeah, 18 years old. stupid. janet: 	and did you marry someone from sweden? burtt: 	no [chuckle]. he was born in connecticut from canadian people and the other one was born in new hampshire from half scotch and half english people. i never married no swede. janet: 	now how do you feel about yourself? do you feel like you're half swedish and half american or how do you see your heritage and who you are as a far as--? burtt: 	well, i'm proud that i'm a swedish. janet: 	what makes you proud? burtt: 	well, it’s just something in you. you're proud to be an american aren't you? yeah, it comes naturally you know. i can't help it but being proud of being a swede, that’s it. i'm swedish and i'm proud of it. janet: 	do you think swedish people have certain qualities, in other words when you say somebody is a swede, what is that usually--? burtt: 	there no different than any other ways. janet: 	you don't think that they're certain characters? burtt: 	yeah, they can lie, they can cheat, they can make you feel rotten [laughter] if you know what that means. i shouldn't say that outward but they can be insulting but you see i lived so long now that i lost all my girlfriends. there isn't anyone left, i had swedish girlfriends and one of them we were widows at the same time so we went around- never mind that. janet: 	how is this time in your life? this time that i guess you call old age at this point. burtt: 	i like it where i am, i want to stay where i am and i don't want anybody coming in and doing anything. i want to work in larry's as much as i can. i want to do for myself but i have to get ready because somebody is going to pick me up tomorrow morning at 9 and it takes me so long to figure out what i got to take with me.  my son i'm going up to tenants harbor, so i'll be going down to tenants harbor and they're going to pick me up at 9 tomorrow morning and i don't have anything to do with any neighbors around here at all. janet: 	why is that? burtt: 	i just don't have anything in common with them you know i have a family over here in the back, they have about six children and them kids will come over here and do anything for me. janet: 	oh that’s nice. burtt: 	yeah, the mother isn't very well but the whole family was over here one winter and shoveled snow. she was in and all of them came. janet: 	[inaudible 01:12:05]. burtt: 	yeah, my god i went out off the back and i looked there was six families. my oldest son is up now tommy and he lives in florida. janet: 	how many do you have? burtt: 	i have two boys. janet: 	careful you got the mic on, just wait till we -- burtt: 	yeah, they're right there. i have two boys and they have three children each. two boys and a girl and one boy and two girls- the oldest and now they're having children, so i'm a great grandmother and i had the new one, he's only three- four days old and that grandson graduated from mit and the other one graduated from a college- the other grandson he graduated from [unclear 01:13:14] college in california and he stayed out there for 12 years and he got in with the company that he is a sales man for them and he makes millions of dollars at each sale.  he's way beyond me i can't even figure him out. he's in scotland now today, taking care of the business in scotland. when he comes home, i won't see him he go right to california but he has an office here in belington. i've been to his office, its a little curby old [chuckle] about this big and instant- you know you press a button to get in there and everything is automatic. janet: 	how do you think your life would have been different if you never left sweden? burtt: 	well, i would never have got to work in an office and taking care of contracts and knowing english and with my memory is what got me that job. janet: 	but if you had stayed in sweden, you probably would have worked for a family-- burtt: 	i would have got nothing because there was nobody behind me there to- janet: 	who was behind you here? what helped you here?  burtt: 	i lost my husband when i was 38, i had two boys and this house and then i had sense enough to go out and start and see where i was. i had a car, i could drive a car. i went down here and like i went into one place down here that was making jewelry and i said, "i hear you're hiring."  i didn't know one from the other, i never heard that they were hiring, he said, "yeah, go on in the see bill," so after i was there i was packing jewelry and of course i couldn't go for too much because i had been sitting here with two kids for all those years and then i had a car and then they were going in to send the jewelry down the province town to have it gold plated. so they said, "can i said [unclear 1:15:54], taking that into the province down the street down in boston.  i went down, i broke it too and i went to a lavatory in summerville and i said to this mrs. delaney, her name was anderson [unclear 01:16:20] anderson- she used to be a swede from vastra. anyway, i said, "oh, i like this work. you know what i can get a job in a dental lab?” she said, "no, but i know a dentist that wants an assistant in [unclear 01:16:39] and you don't need any experience."  so i drove up to [unclear 01:16:52] and i met doctor ainslie, he says, come right in." i went to park and stores and in all i kind of bought myself some uniforms and some white shoes and i stayed there for almost a year and half and then he was going to take off for maine for a month and they wanted me to sit there.  i had just got over being a widow and getting my mind set in all this so i had just set myself to what i wanted to do and what i can do but this is not interesting. janet: 	it’s interesting because you really started over again you might as well say. burtt: 	i did. janet: 	on your own. burtt: 	i did, i started over because i didn't want to lose this house. so anyway i stayed there and then i gave him a notice, he was so mad. oh that man was so mad, he never said goodbye to me. he was going to maine for a month and i told him i didn't want to sit in that office all by myself in his big house then i had the chance to drive a girl down.  a swedish girl came visiting and i had the chance to go and taking her for a ride down to washington and pennsylvania and new york and she had an uncle lived in berretta, he was 80 years old and he said, "would you take her around and show her a little bit of america as long she's here?"  and she was my age so annalisa and i we sat in the front seat and he sat in the back and i took off from new york and we landed in one of the hotels down near 8th street one night when we got there. so we get in and the old man paid everything and we got a room and i walked right into jimmy durante [laughter] and i said, "look, look." "what, what?" she said, she never seen the guy.  i said, "there is jimmy durante." he was just coming out of the hotel, well we drove down the atlantic city, we drove down the philadelphia, we went down to washington and my son gordon had just come out of the service, and he blind you know my oldest son is blind and he had told me to go and see this man and so i called him up and i said, "i'm down here visiting in washington, gordon told me to call you up." he said, "i'll pick you right up and take you all over the place." the only place we missed was the menthe, he took us everywhere and we had lunch and then he told me the next day to know what to do, so we went all out washington. then we drove to philadelphia- this is me driving all these over and i landed up in a hotel up on the hill in philadelphia and we went down to the shopping center and annalisa sported- she could speak english you know so she spotted this place, she said, "there is a place you can hire a car and go and for a sightseeing."  we went in and we hired him so i said, "come and pick us up at the hotel up there," and he was talking and telling us where we were going and going so i said to him, "you better speak louder," i said because she can understand english but he's from sweden and it takes a little longer. "girls come on up and sit beside me," he said so both of us went back. remember now i was in my 40s [laughter].  so he said, "i'm going to take you down to the first swedish church in this country. it’s not my territory," he said, "but i'm going to take you." so he took us down to that church, right down on the water front in philadelphia. well you should have seen the people coming and jumping out on the houses around there, big limousine coming down you knows [laughter].  i said, "my god," i said to annalisa, "that must be a poor place down here," when a limousine attracts. so this man he was a very nice man, he was older than us, he came right in the church with us and the minister took us to the church and told us all about everything and i bought some couple of pieces from the church then we went back and then from there- where did i go? i guess that was the end of the trip [laughter]. janet: 	then when did you start working in [unclear 01:22:44]? burtt: 	oh yeah, i was going to tell you. after we came home and then i heard somebody- a dentist wanted an assistant that didn't need anything and he was an awful man, oh my god. he wasn't sterilizing the tools and it bothered me because i was so clean and everything neat and well that’s a lucky thing to go with the swede so he hired me right on and of course i had the clothes so i went to work.  that was in [unclear 01:23:28] and i worked for him there for a few months i guess it got to be because in august he says, "i'm going on vacation," and i said, "what about me?" he said, "i'm closing up the place." he said, "go and unemployment insurance."  good god i didn't even know what unemployment insurance was but i did and then i don't quite remember if i saw a notice in [unclear 01:24:24] or not but anyway i had dressed up in a nice blue suit and in fact i had the fur cap that i had that with me and i drove into boston-no i didn't i called her up, i said, "are you going to meet me for lunch like we planned?” you know there was this girl and she said, "oh my god, see i got to work, i can't go."  so i got in the car and i drove over to waltium and went up and i called the receptionist there i want to see [unclear 01:25:04] and i said to her, "i'm looking for a job." i know i didn't say, "are you hiring?" like i did down here i know i didn't and i told her i had been working for a dentist and she said, "are you good at filing?" and of course filing was the best thing i could do [laughter].  in the meantime i had taken 10 months of typing down the high school in [unclear 01:25:36], so anyway she said, "can you come and work tomorrow?" i was there wednesday so you see i fell into everything. janet: 	and then you worked your way up? burtt: 	no, but i'll come the next day. i didn't have any clothes to go work in an office. i had dress clothes, i had good dress clothes but then i had been working with the white uniforms for almost two years.  oh was she nice, i don't know why he really took to me i don't know why but she gave me everything i asked for. they sent me out to [unclear 01:26:31] and for eight months in the office and the swedish girl called me up, she was high up with the big shots and of course she was born here you know and she said, "they're hiring a person for that job in bedford," and of course bedford i had been working there once.  so when anne came out i said, "anne i hear you have an opening in bedford office," and she said, "yes, i'll go right back to the office and talk to marie and see if she'll take the [unclear 01:27:15] job and you take the [unclear 01:27:19]," i got it. janet: 	now what job was that? that was the filing? no. burtt: 	that was filing the contracts and the memos and taking in the mail and typing in the mail and that was a really big job because that was a contract by the air force. the air force contract and all them folders. i had to remember memos, i had to put them filing, in coming letters, outgoing letters, any man come and asks, "i want the letters that [unclear 01:27:54] so and so i had to know where they were. so there was a responsible job and these, you say your file collection and all that but i had a lot to do than with the file [laughter] but that’s how i started, that’s how i got in there. i sat in the office for watertown, watertown for three weeks before they let the woman that was filing, they had air force and navy and army you know three contracts and them days they were big contracts. janet: 	so did you stay there until you retired? burtt: 	stayed there for 11 years and i married in the meantime remember with this burtt and i lived on fallen road down there for 12 years with him then he had a heart attack and he died but he had a good job. he worked on a rail road and when i was 55 i said, "what am i working for?" i had this house, i get the rent from this house and whatever income we had he wanted me to pay the tax on so i quit [chuckle]. i quit work when i was 55. janet: 	when you look back over your life, what do you think of the-- burtt: 	i made a mistake getting married so early. i made a big mistake like i met this ellen down the pool here. i knew her father and mother, the name was steeler, his name was l. stellar, he married a swedish girl friend of mine and i met her down to the swimming pool down there and i told her, i said she had divorced the man that she knew and i knew of years ago and she had gone up- and shut that off because this is nothing. janet: 	one thing is did you ever have like heroes in your life? in other words either somebody you knew and you looked up to that encouraged you? burtt: 	no, nobody encouraged me because i had my own will and my boys know it too. i do what i want. i am my own boss. janet: 	and how about how you've changed over? when you think back over your life, do you think you've changed much? burtt: 	well, i hope i get a little smarter [chuckle] than i was when i was married to [unclear 01:30:57] for 18 years and he didn't make much money then i said i was awful stupid. the boys were 7 and 11 and they were going to school and i could have gone out and tried but i didn't have that push and we could have been better off. i bought this house, we were living in a flat in cambridge and this was not like it at all. i have done it all. janet: 	a lot of work on it. burtt: 	yeah and then the back of the house. janet: 	it’s very nice. burtt: 	this is 20 years old now. this was open when i bought it. i crawled in that window there to see the house one sunday. we were a couple and my husband and i, i said, "we are going to buy a house."  janet: 	you're strong willed. burtt: 	i was 27 years old. oh he had no will against me. only he did his thing and i know what he did but it didn't bother me. janet: 	what do you feel most proud of or what do you feel like? burtt: 	i'm proud of the way that i survived and i'm proud of my boys. they both graduated from boston university the same day, they were three years apart but they were in the service.  tommy was in korea and i was all alone because gordon was working in [unclear 01:32:54] hospital when he got blind, when he started to get blind. he was going to be a technician down there, he wanted to be a doctor and he would have been a beautiful doctor.  well, i didn't have a thing to do with just [unclear 01:33:18], they went through university on their own and they came out and gordon the blind one he went to springfield college and got his master's degree then he went to work for the state of massachusetts and he was regional director for the rehabilitation in massachusetts but he had an office in wustuck for 20 years. he worked there for 20 years. janet: 	is there anything else that you can think of that has to do with- you think that the fact that you came here when you a young [crosstalk 01:34:07]. burtt: 	i just thank my god my mother saw fit to bring us here. i told my father that, "you didn't bring us here. mama brought us here,” and thank god that she woke up after all sitting there for eight years. janet: 	now do you think you raised your boys in any ways that were similar to the way your mother raised you? burtt: 	no, i was strict with my boys, she wasn't a bit strict but i was hard on them boys. i was hard on them boys. they were happy, what they done their thing and they've turned out beautiful. janet: 	okay is there anything else you want to say before we close? burtt: 	no, i just say again that i just thank god my mother brought me here because in sweden i wouldn't have had nothing but in time i must have realized that i could make something on my life but it would have been too late then. janet: 	okay, well i've been speaking with ebba burtt and ebba came from sweden in 1926 when she was 15 and i want to thank you very much for most interesting, i have the feeling you could fill up ten tapes easily with all your [crosstalk 01:35:51]. burtt: 	well i'm going to tell you that i had people, educated people talk to me and they had said, "why don't you write a book?" janet: 	well you certainly have a lot to [crosstalk 01:36:02]. burtt: 	if i had the backing and they had somebody to help me i would. janet: 	you would do it,  burtt: 	yeah. i would because i have such a good memory. janet: 	yes and an interesting life. burtt: 	yes, i can say that because i had a boyfriend after my second husband died. he was a swedish man but i had nothing to do with him only travel with him because i know that he cared for me you know what i mean, he liked a companion that was dressed nice and was going places and that’s all he was interested in.  he lived in woben and he was swedish, he was born here and we travelled everywhere and i paid my way but when i bought that little car out there, he didn't want to drive his big car, he said, "oh i love that car," so he drove it a little bit but we got a long fine but then he got sick. he got the tumor on the brain and he had a broken hip, he was older than me, so he died of course but as i said i travelled with him and the kids liked him and we went to florida and we went up to canada. i didn't go to sweden with him and i didn't go to alaska with him, his sister went to sweden with him. janet: 	did you have any interest in going back to sweden? burtt: 	i was there twice in 70 and i made a big mistake because i went to save the trouble of getting a passport. i went second year after, i was there after two years, i went again and six weeks i stayed there and they get boring. janet: 	you were happy to come back here? burtt: 	oh god yes, i was glad that i mean i should never have gone so soon. janet: 	okay, so we're going to close here and i want to thank you again for most interesting-- burtt: 	well, i hope you get something out of it [laughter]. janet: 	well your story will be on file at ellis island now. burtt: 	well good.