 paul: 	good morning this is paul seacrest for the national park service. today is saturday september 24th, 1994. i'm in the ellis island recording studio with alvida lundberg daigle. let me spell all of that for the listener.  in norway her first name was alvida and that’s a-l-v-i-l-d-e with an umlaut over the e. in america they got rid of the l, you became daigle. maiden name lundberg l-u-n-d-b-e-r-g and married name daigle d-a-i-g-l-e.  mrs. daigle came from norway in june, 1915 she was 16 years old at that time. it’s a pleasure to have you here. may we begin by you giving me your birth date please? daigle: 	birthday? my birthday? paul: 		yes. daigle: 	21st of january. paul: 		what year? daigle: 	what year? paul: 		what year were you born? daigle: 	i was 16. i was born in 19-16, must have been about 20 i think. paul: 	you came to this country in 1915 and you were 16 when you came? daigle: 	yeah. paul: 		so you were born in 1899? daigle: 	yeah, something like that. paul: 	you were one year older than the year. where in norway were you born? daigle: 	at christiania, it’s used to be in norway. now it’s oslo. i was born right in christiania, right in the city. paul: 		so christiania was the name of oslo before it was called oslo. daigle: 	yeah, before it was called oslo. i was born in- what are you going to call that? i forgot the name of the street. it’s so long to go but christiania and schools. paul: 		were you born at home? daigle: 	yeah, born home. paul: 	did your mother ever tell you any stories about when you were born? daigle: 	no, i was born out of wedlock, so i don't remember nothing like that but then i wanted to come over here because i had to go to the police station and ask if it’s alright if i leave the country just a few months. i want to come over here, the teacher in school asked us all what we was to going to do, so i told her i wanted to come over here and study different things [unclear 00:03:10].  so of course when i did come over here, i did go to school six months but that time they didn't go from the free school. there was a private school like and after six months i couldn't afford no more because i didn't have much money.  the teacher told me i'm doing good and she said, "i think you'll get a long good," she said to me. see i come over to this country with the little girl and her mother and mind the little girl for her to pay my fee to come over here and i had to work to pay for coming over here to take care of that and take care of the lesson from the school that was too much for me as i told her i couldn't afford no more so i got a job.  i used to go to church all the time and then i met a girl and i asked the girl- she was a norwegian girl and i asked her if she get me a good job, said, "yes." she said that there was someone in new jersey and i got a job as a pastrist for mr. duke. i took care- no, i didn't take care of those [unclear 00:04:57] because duke had a little baby and she used to love me and i used to pick her up and hug her and kiss her and everything and if you ever go to new jersey i wish you see that place, that’s beautiful.  i never saw anything like it and i used to pick that little girl up and bring them in. i used to put the lights on and they used to have a beautiful room, i can't tell you how nice it was. paul: 	before we talk too much about america, i want to talk some more about norway. i want to go back to norway when you were a little girl in norway. can you describe the house that you lived in in norway? daigle: 	i lived in just a family house, small family house. paul: 		can you describe it for me? what it looked like? daigle: 	yeah, it looked like an ordinary house that they got over here and [unclear 00:05:59]. i used to go from there to school. paul: 		how many rooms did the house have? daigle: 	they had three rooms i think. paul: 		how did you keep the house warm? daigle: 	warm, it used to be nice and warm all the time. we used to warm with wooden coal, wooden coal we used to have. we didn't have new steam heat or nothing. paul: 		can you describe what the kitchen looked like? daigle: 	kitchen looked like very plain. very plain, stove. that’s so long ago that i've forgotten but about everything in there was very plain. see, i wasn't rich, nothing and my mother nothing, not rich either. she didn't even have nothing. paul: 		what was your mother's name? daigle: 	marie clauson. paul: 		can you spell clauson? daigle: 	yeah, c-l-a-u-s-o-n, clauson. paul: 		tell me what your mother's personality was like? daigle: 	my mother was very good to me, i say that because when i wrote to her and told her i got married, so she used to like to neat all the time and she made a nice pair of mitten for the first baby was born and i took him for a walk and lost one mitten, i've got to pin them up. he lost one mitten. i never found the mitten there again. i felt bad about it. paul: 	when you were growing up in norway, how many people lived in your house? daigle: 	it used to be two family house and the family upstairs was a man and his wife and they had two children i think. paul: 	how about in your family? how many people are in your family in the house? daigle: 	that used to be only me and my mother and it used to be another family next to us. that’s about all. paul: 		so you were the only child? daigle: 	i had another one, my brother but him and i we never bothered another much. paul: 		was he older than you were? daigle: 	he was younger than i am. paul: 		he was younger than you. daigle: 	yeah. paul: 		did you know your father? daigle: 	no, i don't remember. paul: 		you never met your father. daigle: 	no, i remember my father. paul: 	when you were a little girl, what kinds of things did you enjoy doing with your mother? daigle: 	when i used to go school, i used to stay with another family most of the time and i used to help her to do the housework. she was very nice. [unclear 00:09:03], her name is mrs. [unclear 00:09:09] and she was very nice. her daughter come from america 1914 i think and she brought a little girl over and that’s how i come over here because she paid for my fee but when i got to america i had to do more work and pay for all that. paul: 	so you took care of mrs. [unclear 00:09:37] little girl when you came over to america? daigle: 	yeah. paul: 		why did you leave away from home when you went to school? daigle: 	i tell you, the teacher asked us what we were going to do, so i told her i wanted to come over here to learn the language, english and see different things and then go back to norway again and then down the police station, he asked me the same thing. paul: 	when you were a little girl going to school, why did you live at somebody' else's house? daigle: 	why did i live in somebody else's house? well you used to do the work for them, help them up the house work. she had very bad leg and she was quite well up and she seemed to take a liking to me and i helped with her housework. in the meantime her daughter come, with this little girl and that’s how i got over here. paul: 		you say that you were religious, what religion were you? daigle: 	i used to be a protestant. paul: 		was your mother a religious person? daigle: 	she was good but she could be better you know what i mean? she didn't go to church very often like me. i believed in church that’s where i got all these job over here. paul: 		when you were in norway, did you go to church frequently? daigle: 	oh yeah. paul: 		tell me what you remember about worship in norway? daigle: 	i remember to go to church every sunday and the minister, of course i don’t' remember much about it but i remember he was good and he was always good to me because he knew i was kind of left alone, i don't remember much.  i used to have to go, be in the house 8 o'clock because at 8 o'clock the church bells used to ring for kids. they used to go to [unclear 00:12:02] class and i thought that was very nice of them to see that you couldn't run around or nothing like that. paul: 		do you remember any prayers that you said in norwegian? daigle: 	i remember the kids, all the children had. i remember them told them every night they have to say [foreign 00:12:33]. i've forgotten the thing, but its children. all knew the prayers in norwegian and i could talk norwegian too for a long until i went to school then started to english and so did i. that’s how we were able to talk english. paul: 		can you describe celebrating christmas for me in norway? daigle: 	oh yeah, christmas eve we all got little bundle of present. see over here it happens christmas day then the next day was christmas, we used to open all our presents that every had and the woman i used to mind the little girl, she was awful nice to me she used to always dress me up nice and make me look nice. paul: 	do you remember a dress that you had in norway when you were a little girl that sticks out in your mind? daigle: 	i had just plain dress, very plain. everything was very plain what i had and i come over with girl, she was norwegian too but she was a very nice girl but when she come over here she took sick, she had to go back again. so it was just plain. paul: 		did your mother have a job in norway? daigle: 	yeah, she used to work in the mill i think. paul: 		did she ever talk about her experiences in the mill? daigle: 	no, she never told me much about it. paul: 		were there other relatives that lived near you in norway? daigle: 	no, i don’t' remember no relations. paul: 		grandparents, your mother's parents maybe? daigle: 	i know they were dead, she was alone. she was alone too. paul: 	i see, was there something that your mother enjoyed doing? you said she liked to knit? daigle: 	yeah, she used to. paul: 		was there anything else that she got great pleasure out of doing? daigle: 	no, all i remember that she used to work all day and come home and when she had time she would knit different things and of course the school i used to go to they used to show us kids to knit and crochet and everything like that. paul: 	tell me about when you were a little girl, what was your favorite activity? what did you really enjoy doing when you were a little girl in norway? daigle: 	oh when i was small, i used to love to stay home with my mother knit. i used to knit my stockings and everything. it used to be very cold, home. very cold and i used to make my own sweaters and everything like that. we make everything. paul: 	you made your clothes too? daigle: 	oh yes, i made a lot of things. even for my eyes gave up very early. that was history, i used to love read history. i used to stay in, tell the teacher, "i would love to see america," i said and then different things. so she says, "maybe someday you will go over there." and i told her, i said, "yes, i will go over there." but that’s a long- we stayed too long, i won't stay for good but things changed different. i come over here and i paid up all my bills for the deal of the girl and did the job [unclear 00:16:50]. paul: 	did a lot of people from norway go to america but then go back to norway to live? daigle: 	no, i only knew one girl. one girl come home with me and she was a nice girl, she was the same age as me and when she came over she took sick and she said to me, she said, "i have to call my mother to take me back," she said, "i feel awful [unclear 00:17:19]."  i felt bad because she was the only one i could be with all the time, so she went back to norway, so i don't know how she made up because i got working with that little girl and going to school. i was so busy i didn't have time to check up on her. paul: 	tell me what kinds of food people ate in norway when you were growing up? daigle: 	probably, a lot of fish and we had potatoes. paul: 	would your mother make potatoes and cabbage? daigle: 	potatoes- she used to put milk and butter in them, it was nice and nice carrots, she used to buy a lot of carrots and celery. she used the celery. paul: 	what would she make for a special occasion? what is a special food? daigle: 	we didn't have much to experience of special food. we used to have everything very plain. paul: 	tell me about what you remember at the time of the beginning of world war 1? what do you remember about the beginnings of world war 1? say just before you left, 1913, 1914... daigle: 	for the war? paul: 	just when the war is starting and you're still in norway, what do you remember about that? daigle: 	see i come over here three weeks after the titanic sank but the thing it got sank, it hit big iceberg and then i come over the danish ship. brand new and i come on the second class and i had the little girl’s mother was sick all the times. it’s a good thing i had care that little girl. paul: 	do you remember the name of the ship? daigle: 	yes, it was a danish ship. it’s not funny. paul: 	but you'll think of it as we're going along. what do you remember about world war 1, in the beginnings of world war 1? daigle: 	war 1, we come over here three weeks after they sign the peace and we come over here and the boat sank. we had to go way up north. i remember that because i prayed we will not going to hit the iceberg and we were war with germany and german captain and captain of our ship talked together then they had to go up the ladder and they talked to find out what the ship had anything that belonged to germany but we didn't have nothing because i heard the minute he told the captain had something that belonged to germany, our ship was going ahead and everything turned out alright. paul: 	how did your mother feel about you going to america? daigle: 	she felt bad, i remember that so i told her, i said i will write to her and she did. she write to me and first thing you know a few years after she died and they sent me note from norway. i don't know who sent me the note and they told me my mother died. i felt bad because all she done little for me but she could have done more for me and i study very hard to get where i am today. paul: 	did your mother want to come to america? daigle: 	no, she didn't want me to come. paul: 	but did she want to come? daigle: 	no, no. paul: 	like once you were here, did she want? daigle: 	no, she didn't want to come. no, she didn't want to come. paul: 	do you remember what you packed to take with you? daigle: 	i packed a lot of things in the trunk. all my clothes and everything and everything was plain and i had some couple of nights just to select [unclear 00:22:17] and i when i minded the little girl because they used to dance and have a good time all the time on the ship and it was a brand new ship. it was a nice ship, danish ship. paul: 	did anyone give you a little present before you left norway? daigle: 	no, i never got nothing. paul: 	did you take something with you as a remembrance of norway? daigle: 	no, i didn't. paul: 	because your intention was to go back to norway. daigle: 	all that trip was in my books, that’s all. all my books, the study nights but i didn't have no personal nothing. paul: 	where did the ship leave from? daigle: 	from the christiania, right from the city. paul: 	was that the first time you had been on a large ship? daigle: 	yeah. paul: 	what did you think when you got on this ship? daigle: 	i didn't know what to say, i didn't know what to think because i was coming over here with nobody and the good thing i had little girl to take care of. so i stayed with her three years to pay up my fee. paul: 	do you remember how much the fair cost? daigle: 	no, it didn't cost much. i've forgotten how much i paid. i forgot how much i paid but i know i paid it up anyway and then i got the job as a [unclear 00:23:54]. paul: 	how long did the ship take to get to america? daigle: 	it took about 12 days. paul: 	do you remember seeing anything unusual on the ship that you had never seen before? daigle:	no, i didn’t' see nothing. paul: 	how did you feel on the ship? did you get sea sick? daigle: 	alright on the ship. i felt alright and the ship was sailing nice but when they get to rough there, we used to go underneath. we never stayed on the top of the ship much because we are also afraid if we get [unclear 00:24:33]. paul: 	where did they feed you on the ship? daigle: 	they had a nice dining room. oh yes, that nice dining room, we used to eat in the dining room. had nice meal, three meals a day, all lovely meals. paul: 	did the ship supply any kind of activities for you to do? daigle: 	oh, yes, we could do what we wanted. every night the ladies come down, with beautiful gowns and they used to dance. we used to watch them dancing, we used to love that. yes, we used to love that and i used to bring my little girl there in my hand all the time and the big girl that took sick, we used to watch them dance all the time. we used to have a good time like that. paul: 	so it was very elegant on the ship? daigle: 	oh yeah. paul: 	do you remember having to go through safety drills on the ship? did they teach you how to put on a life jacket or..? daigle: 	no, never done that. paul: 	so the ship took 12 days, do you remember seeing the statue of liberty when you came in to new york harbor? daigle: 	yes, i see and i was glad to see it because we read in the history. like i loved to do history, geography and when i see it i said to my girlfriend, "that’s statue of liberty, isn't that wonderful?"  we looked at it so much. we used to love to look at it because we thought it was so nice. paul: 	what happened after the ship arrived in new york? were you brought to ellis island? daigle: 	no, then with this woman. see this woman was married and her husband came and met her and she was sick i remember that and i had the little girl by the hand. she was about three years old i think, i mind her and i went home with them. paul: 	so you went home right from the ship, you didn't have to come over to ellis island? daigle: 	no. paul: 	they didn’t' check you out? daigle: 	no, i come over here. yes, the man asked me if i speak english, i said, "no," and from there i've been with my friend and the little girl. she lived in summerville, new jersey. paul: 	do you remember anything else that happened when you were here at ellis island? the man asked you if you spoke english, do you remember anything else of what happened when you were here? daigle: 	no, i don't remember nothing else. paul: 	but the woman's husband came..? daigle: 	yeah, he didn't ask me too many questions but he asked me if i speak english, i said, "no, i don't." paul: 	had you learned any english in school in norway? daigle: 	no, never done no school. i done everything the hard way. paul: 	so the husband came and you all went to summerville new jersey and you stayed with them... daigle: 	yeah, i stayed with them for about a year till i get through paying up the fee to come. paul: 	did they live in a nice house? daigle: 	oh yeah, they lived in a nice house. he took pictures, a photographer you know. yes, he had very good job. paul: 	did he have his own photograph studio? daigle: 	yeah, he had everything nice. paul: 	did he ever take your picture? daigle: 	well, he took it with my little girl but nothing serious, no. paul: 	had you ever been photographed in norway? daigle: 	yes, we used to take a lot of pictures in the school. paul: 	do you have any of those pictures now? daigle: 	i used to have them but moving around so much i think i lost them. paul: 	we're going to pause for a moment and peter is going to flip the tapes over and then we're going to talk about what it was like getting adjusted to america. okay, we're now beginning again with daigle daigle. mrs. daigle, tell me about how learnt english? daigle: 	i went to school over here. paul: 	was this during the day or at night? daigle: 	no, in the morning. i was at private school because this woman had about seven or eight people and [unclear 00:29:15] and i learned english there. i had to pay for it. paul: 	did that happen as soon as you got here? did you start going to school as soon as you arrived in summerville? daigle: 	no, i didn't go, after i got [unclear 00:29:33] from her. schooling and then to work. i got through paying for her to school and paying for the girl. i didn’t' have much money, i used to go to church and i met this girl in church and i asked her if she could get me good job and she says, "yes, i can get you good job if you want to." i stayed overnight with her because she was working for this family so she took me to the [unclear 00:30:07] and i stayed with her three years. paul: 	when you were taking care of the little girl for that year or whatever the time was while you were paying back your passage, did you just speak norwegian in the house or were you beginning to learn english at that point? before you started to go to school. daigle: 	the little girl. paul: 	when you were taking care of the little girl, did you speak norwegian? daigle: 	[unclear 00:30:34] we used to stay home with the mother then to school and i come back and take care of the little girl and to do the housework beside. paul: 	did they speak norwegian in the house? daigle: 	no, the little girl forgot to speak english. she didn't know how to speak norwegian like i did and i had to learn from her mother and father to speak english. paul: 	so you started learning a little english while you were there? daigle: 	oh yeah. paul: 	do you remember what the first word was that you learnt in english? daigle: 	thank you. paul: 	did you ever sing like a lullaby norwegian to the little girl? daigle: 	oh yes, i used to sing all kind of songs. paul: 	do you remember one of those now. daigle: 	no, they used to sing norwegian songs you know my little girl you know i love you and something like that. paul: 	can you sing a little norwegian song for us right now? daigle: 	oh i can't sing the song now, no. paul: 	did you love the little girl? daigle: 	i used to love the little girl. yes, i used to love the little girl as much as she was my own but i couldn't stay there because i didn't get enough money. i never used to go nowhere. i used to go to church and back, church and back.  i said to myself, "well, when the time is up i think i'll go home again." but then this girl i met in church she got me the job, not to take care of the little girl [unclear 00:32:22] because she was very rich and i used to go in there and put the lights on. paul: 	were they electric lights or gas lights? daigle: 	electric, oh they had the beautiful. if you ever go to new jersey, summerville, new jersey you see the house is beautiful. paul: 	tell me some of the other duties that you had once you went to work for the duke family. what other things did you have to do? daigle: 	i was waitress there, waiting on them, waiting the table. paul: 	who taught you how to do that? daigle: 	myself with the other waitress showed me how to do. i used to bring the little girl and she used to come and meet me, [unclear 00:33:09] everybody to fool around. she had her own nurse maid this girl. she used to wait for me downstairs in the morning and i pick her up in her arms and i bring her in the dining room but her mother and father used to- and the father used to say to the little girl, "everything you see here doll, belongs to you." paul: 	she was being trained right from the beginning? daigle: 	oh yes. paul: 	did you have to wear a uniform? daigle: 	yes, we used to wear black and white i think. white little apron and a black dress, white apron. paul: 	did you live in the house? daigle: 	i had a beautiful room. paul: 	what did it look like? describe the room for me? daigle: 	great big room, the nice lovely bed [unclear 00:34:05] and rock on the floor until its lovely. that was on the fifth and the third floor they had a lot of butlers there and maids to do all the work and i had been with the waitress. the waitress and i and the father was the housemen there, he took care of the [unclear 00:34:32]. so her and i we used to have a bicycle, we used to ride around the park after we got all through with the work and i stayed there three years. paul: 	were the other servants in the house all immigrants? daigle: 	well, we didn't bother much for them. no, most of the butlers, they're most from england i think. paul: 	what about the kitchen staff? the people in the kitchen where were they from? daigle: 	i don’t' know where they come from, we didn't bother much to fit in the kitchen. paul: 	were you the only norwegian person? daigle: 	yeah. paul: 	what was the nationality of the girl that you went bicycling with? daigle: 	she was irish but she was american born here but the father and mother- her mother was dead and the father was the houseman there and he had a house on the park and he used to play the violin and the daughter played the piano and they used to sing. but i forgot the songs. paul: 	did the duke family ever do anything for the--? daigle: 	mrs. duke, she wanted me to go down south and study how to take care of them rich children but i still didn’t' want that. i said to myself, "i got be tied down all the time and never be able to go no place or nothing." i went to back in new york and met the [unclear 00:36:32] navy men there, [unclear 00:36:34]. i met my husband there and i got married and i never been back there with dukes. paul: 	what was your husband's name? daigle: 	mathias daigle. paul: 	can you spell the first name, mathias? daigle: 	m-a-t-h-i-a-s. paul: 	what year did you get married? daigle: 	what year? i've been married a long time. i really forgotten. we got married in the city hall in new york, cheap you know. paul: 	was he norwegian? daigle: 	no, he was american. his people lived in fall river [unclear 00:37:26]. paul: 	your mother was still living when you got married? daigle: 	oh yes. paul: 	how did she feel about you getting..? daigle: 	well, she was happy i was settled. she said, "i'm glad you got a good man and you're settled." because she said, "i was worried about you." but i was very careful [unclear 00:37:48] and when you work in the places you can only stay out so long. paul: 	i want to ask you another question about the duke family. did any member of the duke family every address you directly?  daigle: 	yeah, they wanted me to stay there and take care of that little girl. paul: 	so they would actually speak to you directly? daigle: 	yeah and they wanted to take me down the south to learn how to take care of them rich children but i didn’t. i said to myself, "geez, i have to go down there and come back again, [00:38:40]" and the little girl was very nice and no never did. paul: 	was there something about america that you didn't like? daigle: 	no, i liked everything about america. paul: 	was there something unusual that you saw in america that you had never seen before in norway? daigle:	no, i remember seeing everything. everything i saw was nice to me. i didn’t see nothing wrong for me and nothing and i was taken care that way. paul: 	so no one ever made fun of you because you were an immigrant? did anyone ever make fun of you because you were an immigrant or insult you in some way? daigle: 	no, nobody ever make fun of me, no. i didn't bother much with anybody anyway because when i had time to study, i studied my homework and then i used to go out but i always come back early. paul: 	after you got married, did you ever want take your husband to norway? daigle: 	oh yes, we talked about that lots of time but he wasn't very rich himself and we had very hard time when you got the fall river together tenement. we had to stay with her mother and her husband died and he died before i got married to her son. no, he was rather nice and we got to tenement almost a year after and she had about eight kids herself. so pretty very crowded, even during the war the hard to get the tenement and then finally i got [unclear 00:40:47]? paul: 	for me what it looked like? daigle: 	it was about small dining room and the bedroom and kitchen [unclear 00:41:06]. paul: 	did it have electricity? daigle: 	oh yes, we had electricity. we had everything. paul: 	how long did you live in fall river? daigle: 	i've been living in fall river all my life [unclear 00:41:22]. paul: 	now living in fall river [unclear 00:41:25] living in new jersey. daigle: 	no, because new jersey i lived with the dukes. that was elegant, the most elegant there you know. beautiful rooms and everything. they had beautiful fountain in the middle of the floor. i can't describe it to you how beautiful it was. paul: 	different than that. daigle: 	yes. paul: 	did you and your husband ever go back to visit norway? in your adult life, did you ever go back to visit? daigle: 	no. paul: 	you've never been back. daigle: 	no, never been back. first he get the job, he could have got job in boston. all the cops was on strike that time and he could have gone there and he got job as the police but he got a better job in america [unclear 00:42:25]. he work on [unclear 00:42:32], you know that more money than everything, so i told him we'll just stay and then i’ll be alright and he didn't go back to boston to be a policeman. he could have been a policeman because they hired all the veterans. paul: 	had he been a veteran of world war 1? daigle: 	oh yeah. paul: 	did your husband fight during world war 1. daigle: 	yes, it was the war. he fought. he almost got drowned one time. they got the german ship and then they got to new jersey somebody sank the ship. they didn't have nothing, no clothes and nothing. he had to write to his mother ask her to get her some money to buy the... but in the meantime he said the red cross come and help with clothes. paul: 	did he like to talk about his experiences during world war 1. daigle: 	no, he don't like to talk about [unclear 00:43:36], he was the first class machinist in the boat, that’s a very good job. i'm a bit [unclear 00:43:46]. paul: 	tell me how do you think your life would have been different if you had stayed in norway? daigle: 	the only way i can figure go on with school, finish school. when i finish school i then 15, i would have learned how to make clothes and things like that. paul: 	do you think that your life would have been better had you stayed in norway or better here? daigle: 	i don't think so because i've been very happy since i've been married and i had a big family, my own now. paul: 	can you name your children for me? daigle: 	i lost three so drolan, albert and pauline and innet and i forgot the name of the other. isn't that awful. i forgot. raymond i think his name. paul: 	and you say that you lost three children. daigle: 	i lost three. paul: 	well, i guess my final question for you is are you happy that you came to this country? daigle: 	yes, i'm very happy and i had my hard times you know i had days but now i'm very happy because i got nice family and they all love me so i have been very satisfied. paul: 	before we end, can you say something in norwegian for us? can you maybe say a hymn maybe? the words to a hymn if you're religious or something in norwegian. daigle: 	i'm glad i met you- something like that? paul: 	sure something like that. daigle: 	[unclear 00:46:02] that’s all i can remember. paul: 	alright, this is paul seacrest signing off with daigle daigle on saturday september 24th, 1994 at ellis island. thank you very much mrs. daigle. daigle: 	it’s all finished this now? paul: 	yes, we're all finished now.  