 janet:	today is april 19th 1994. i’m here today with giacinto di giacinto, who came from italy in 1920 when he was 11 years old. mr. di giacinto is now 85 years old.  we’re here in the oral history studio at ellis island. i want to say welcome, it’s a pleasure. i’m looking forward to what you remember which seems to be a great deal.  let’s start at the beginning, give your birth date and the town in italy where you were born. giacinto:	my name is nazareth di giacinto as you already know. i was born on february 7th, 1909 in arsita in italy. janet:	could you spell arsita? giacinto:	a-r-s-i-t-a, the providence of abruzzo. janet:	did you live in arsita up until the time that you came to america? giacinto:	yes. janet:	what do you remember about the town? giacinto:	it was a small village and you don’t remember much because we lived out in the country. the only time we went to town maybe once a week, once every couple of weeks. it was about, i would say, four miles from where we lived, between three and four miles roughly. of course then that’s where we went to school. janet:	how did you get to school? giacinto:	a nice pair of legs. we walked to school and that was it. i went to school till i came into this country. i started about six or seven years old and i went to school about three or four years. janet:	what did people do in the town of arsita? giacinto:	it’s like any other small villages, it wasn’t too big, it wasn’t such a big place. we had a church and we had a couple of canteens which we didn’t see too often because like i say we never got there.  my grandparents, they had a little place maybe a couple of acres, two three acres. they used to raise anything they used, that was what they raised in the summers what they ate in the winter. janet:	did they have livestock as well as growing? giacinto:	my grandparents was very poor and they didn’t have an enormous amount of livestock, all they had maybe chickens. once in a while they raised the pig and they have that for the year. at the end of the year in autumn they killed them. they preserved the meat and hang the meat in the kitchen there and smoke them. about three, four times a year you had a piece of meat to eat. janet:	was this your mother’s parents or your father’s? giacinto:	no, it was my father’s parents because in those days when they got married the woman went with the husband. if you had six girls and they married, they each went to their husband’s home. they lived together, there’s no such a thing. that was the custom in those days. janet:	what was your father’s name? giacinto:	john. janet:	do you remember your grandmother or grandfather’s names? giacinto:	yes. grandfather’s name was joseph. my grandmother’s name was francesca. janet:	can you remember them? what they looked like? how they were with you? giacinto:	it’s a long time ago. we came to this country as i said 11 years old then i never saw them anymore. janet:	when you think about them, are there any pictures that you have in your mind of either times you spent with them or? giacinto:	yes. i remember my grandmother and of course she was home a little bit more than my grandfather. my grandfather was out on the little field he had there from early morning to late at night. my grandmother, she’d have a walnut in her pocket and she’ll call me over and she’ll give me a walnut and things like that. janet:	did she ever tell you stories? giacinto:	i don’t think there was too much storytelling in those days. janet:	did you have sisters and brothers? giacinto:	i had one brother in italy. my sisters, which i have three but they were born after we came to this country. janet:	what was your brother’s name? your brother who was born in italy? giacinto:	valentine. janet:	was he older than you? giacinto:	no he was younger. he was four and a half years younger than me but he’s deceased, a couple of years now, he died. janet:	how about your mother’s name? giacinto:	angelina. janet:	her maiden name? giacinto:	panelli, p-a-n-e-l-l-i. janet:	did you ever see her mother and father? giacinto:	i remember her father but her mother, i don’t remember because she died before i was born. janet:	what do you remember about her father? giacinto:	he was a short man, a typical italian man, short but he died when i was very young, i might have been maybe four, five years old, six years old when he died. i don't remember too much about him. janet:	do you remember his first name? giacinto:	no, i’m sorry about that. i don’t remember his first name. janet:	what kind of a woman was your mother? how would you describe your mother from the time when you were up to 11 years old when you were living over in italy? giacinto:	like i say the customary is that you live with your in-laws when you get married out there you live with your in-laws. if you have children you stay with the in-laws and you raise them. you had respect for your grandparents, you had respect for your mother, you had respect for your father. my father i didn’t see too much till i came into this country. janet:	tell me about your father and when he came here. giacinto:	the first time my father came here was in 1905. because he know there was nothing in italy for him. in those days everybody tried to come to america to try to make a living. he came here for a couple of years and stayed here a couple of years and then he went back.  he went back and he joined the italian army. he was in the army for three years, he was discharged and they got married, he married my mother. married my mother and ended up my mother pregnant with me and he came back to this country.   he stayed in this country another, i would say, maybe five, six years or whatever, four, five years or something like that. then he came back. i was already born because my mother was eight months pregnant when he left her.  he was in italy. he stayed in italy for maybe a year or so. of course these things was told to me later on, i don’t remember that far behind.  then my mother was pregnant with my brother. my father stayed there till my brother was born and he was about nine months. my brother was about nine months when he left again to come to america. janet:	you were about five years old by then? giacinto:	by then i was about five years old. janet:	do you remember your father in italy before he came back here? giacinto:	yes. i distinctly remember like it was yesterday. janet:	really, what do you remember about him then? giacinto:	i remember he was a large young man. he came home one day, because in those days on the other side in the old country. we didn’t have anything to make sandwiches with or anything. anything we ate was maybe potatoes for breakfast or onions and an omelet or something like that.  we were eating fried potatoes and he said to my mother he says, “why don’t you make a sandwich for the boy.” i said, “pa,” i said- of course this was in italian, i said, “this is not meat that you can make a sandwich with, we don’t eat sandwiches. we have nothing to put in the sandwiches here.” that i remember just like it was yesterday.  after my brother was born then he came back here and he stayed here, he saved some money. then right away while he come back here world war 1 broke out. then he stayed here so he didn’t come back again until the war was over. janet:	do you remember those war years when he was over …? giacinto:	yeah. janet:	what do you remember about those years? giacinto:	i remember that we used to hear from a distance, we used to hear bombs going off. we were nowhere near where they were fighting but we did hear the bombs going off, we would be on the fields. of course, i used to go to my grandfather and work a little bit, make believe i was big man working. i was only about six, seven years old. janet:	what kind of work were you…? giacinto:	you dig, you work the ground. we used to hear bombs go off, it was shocking, it was terrible. we didn’t have the knowledge or knowhow just like you have today of everything around the world. all you did was maybe you heard somebody said this, somebody said that. we had no newspapers to read or anything like that. janet:	did you have radios? giacinto:	radios? forget about radios. we didn’t even have radios when we came in this country. janet:	where did people socialize in town? where did they get together? giacinto:	the got together at harvest time. they used to get neighbors, help neighbors, they come to your house, they harvest corn, wheat.  after they’ve done their work at night time they used to have a little dance with the accordion. women dancing, young fellows and women, that was their recreation. you had no recreation what you have today, as recreation is known today, forget about it. janet:	did anybody in your family play an instrument or sing or? giacinto:	no, because my grandfather, he didn’t play any instrument. there was neighbors they used to have accordion and they used to play. when most women worked on the fields, they’d start at sunrise and they quit at sunset. on the way home the women would start singing and from a distance you could hear them. janet:	i bet that’s a fun memory. giacinto:	which it brings back memories. janet:	your mother would be among those women walking back…? giacinto:	on occasion yeah, she would be, she worked on the fields too. it used to be like maybe one woman stay home and cook and the other women work on the fields and then they bring lunch. in the afternoon they cook and then bring lunch to the people working. night time they used to eat when they went home. washed their face, ate, say the rosary at night and go to bed. get up in the morning with the birds or the rooster. that was it. janet:	what did the town look like? do you remember? giacinto:	i can’t tell you too much about the town. it was a little town it had a little main street and up on a hill was a church. the holy days they used to have processions and they had a couple of bakers. we didn’t patronize those places because people baked their own bread.  janet:	do you remember any dishes that your mother made that were particularly good that you remember? giacinto:	i still make them now. i cook myself now because i have no wife so i do my own cooking. janet:	what do you cook that you remember from when you were little? giacinto:	i could say lentils, beans, pasta fagioli, if you know what that means. today we know such a thing as lasagna but in those days we knew nothing about lasagna because number one, you wouldn’t have the ingredients to make it. number two, they didn’t have any. it was mostly vegetables, meat we got maybe two, three, times a year. janet:	did you have cows? did you have milk, cheese? giacinto:	no, we had no milk. we used to have a couple of nanny goats. they used to make cheese with the milk, which you used on your macaroni and spaghettis and things like that. anything you had you raised, if a doctor came to visit you, you paid him off with a chicken. janet:	do you remember medical care at that time? if you got sick what was the usual treatment? giacinto:	you call a doctor. janet:	there was a doctor in your town? giacinto:	there was a doctor in town. if he couldn’t come then -i remember one time i was sick, i was quite sick when i was young with sore throat and different things like that which i found out later. i couldn’t walk so they took me on a donkey and they took me town. you see the doctor and then you go home you go to bed. janet:	were there any folk remedies that people used that were not through a doctor but were herbs or…? giacinto:	yes, they would be like you gaggle with salt, you gaggle with vinegar, these home remedies. when the home remedies didn’t work, [inaudible 00:18:38] that then you went to the doctor. that’s the way it was. janet:	how about religion? were you…? giacinto:	we’re catholic. janet:	were your family religious? giacinto:	yes, my family was catholic. we are religious up until today. we still go to the church. i still keep our religion up. janet:	do you remember any observances of religious days in italy that were different than the way things are done here? giacinto:	saint rocco, they would have processions and immaculate conception and different things like that. they would have processions. janet:	what would the procession consist of? what would…? giacinto:	there much the same like they do here. they march the same down in the main street and then the church, then you went to church and you prayed. janet:	were there market days? do you remember market days? giacinto:	it wasn’t market days.  it might have been maybe for some people that had a lot of stuff that they could sell probably. my grandfather, he didn’t have too much, he just had but enough to exist on his own and he couldn’t.  i remember when i was a young boy, my grandfather used to go in the forest and make a bundle of wood. i used to look forward to going with him, that i would -he’d make a little bundle for me, then we go home.  maybe a certain day, i don’t remember what day it would be, but we’d go to the market and we’d sell them. he got maybe couple of pennies, it was no dollars or liras, it was just a couple of pennies you got. they made you feel like you was doing something. janet:	do you remember anything that your grandfather or your mother tried to teach you? in other words, ideas or attitudes that they thought were important for you to have to live by or values? giacinto:	yes, respect and obedience. janet:	you were respectful of your elders? that was important. giacinto:	that’s right. janet:	how did you show it? what were the ways that you showed that you were being respectful? giacinto:	an older man, you always addressed them as uncle. janet:	even if he was unrelated? giacinto:	if he was unrelated, uncle. your grandfather you say nonno. grandmother you say nonna too. janet:	nonno too? giacinto:	yeah. if you’d done anything you ask forgiveness. janet:	of whom? giacinto:	of whoever you offended, right. as far as i can remember we were brought up with lots of respect. janet:	were you a good little boy or were you a …? giacinto:	i couldn’t do anything bad because i was all by myself. i had a couple of relatives, i don’t know if they were nieces, whatever they were. sometimes we used to go to school together.  one day we decided we wouldn’t go to school. we stopped at a mill, at that time there was a water mill. they had like a little lake up ahead where they used the water for power to turn the mill. everybody went there to have their wheat ground, their corn. we decided to go swimming.   when it was time to go home we figured we’d go home. i got home. my mother said to me, “did you go to school today?” i said, “yeah.” pow! i got it across the face. i said to myself, “what happened here,” i did mention it. she said, “did you go to school today?” i said, “yes.” pom! on the other side, she says, “you were swimming down at the mill.” the postman from the village, he used to go delivering mail, he saw us. he said to my mother he says, “your son was down there with a couple of other kids swimming.” that was first and last time i played hooky. janet:	was your mother strict with you? giacinto:	yes, they had to be because when you live with your grandparents -after all she’s a stranger, and she has to be under her wing too. i remember one incident, i don’t know if it has any bearing on it but i remember one incident when we were having supper.  i don’t know what we were eating; it was something that i must have liked. you get your share and you want a quarter of the size. i said to my mother i said, “ma, i don’t want it it’s too small.” mother says, “you better eat.” “no, i don’t want to eat.” “you better eat.” i said, “no, i don’t want to eat.”  they all finished eating, cleaned the table, that’s it. we slept upstairs, on the way up i said to my mother i said, “ma, i’m hungry.” she says, “my dear boy there’s nothing i can do.” maybe it almost killed her but i had to go to bed hungry. janet:	how did your mother get along with your father’s parents? giacinto:	you have to get along, they got along- you have to get along. like i say, it’s not your life you have to i’ve the life of the household. it’s a family it’s not an individual. janet:	did you have chores you did? giacinto:	pardon? janet:	did you have chores to do around the house? giacinto:	we had certain things like maybe, they done this just to teach you, not that it amounted to anything but just to teach you. say, “well look, this piece of ground it’s up to you to cultivate.” you cultivate, [inaudible 00:28:06] what kind of six seven year old can cultivate? things like that. janet:	i think we’ll pause here and turn the tape over. then we’ll continue about coming to america. we’re starting on side b and i’m talking with giacinto di giacinto. let’s talk about how it decided that you’d come to this country. giacinto:	like i said before my father came back here after my brother was born. he was here about four- five years. then after the war he saved enough money. when he came he was working 10 hours a day 10 cents an hour on a railroad. 10 hours a day you got a dollar a day. janet:	where was he? giacinto:	in jersey city here. no, when he first came back i think he was in pennsylvania. janet:	was he laying ties, is that what he was doing on the railroad? giacinto:	yeah, rails and ties. i don’t know how long he was in pennsylvania but he was in pennsylvania for a short while because i think when he came back he went to pennsylvania which he had some friends of his or so. then he decided to come and he settled here in jersey city.  he was working 10 hours a day for 10 cents an hour. those days like i say, 10 cents an hour was nothing in today’s standing but 10 cents an hour, a dollar a day you was able to just about eat. you had no luxuries, you had no shows, you had no plays, you had no cars, you had no rail, you had no television.  you grew your own little patch of -when he worked on a railroad for i don’t know how long but when he worked on a railroad, they used to have a shack. many guys live in this particular shack, free of rent. it used to have a garden on the outside and they used to raise whatever they -they used to eat with that. he was able to save a few dollars.  after the war he sent for us, which was i don’t know how much problem it was. it was a problem in those days because in those days it’s not what it is today. you had a certain amount of people coming in every year from different countries.  you had to have- number one. you had to be in good health. number two, you had to have somebody that when you came here they was responsible for you. my father saved enough money to bring us into this country. we left on about the first week of january 1920 and we got here 28th of january. janet:	do you remember what you’re mother packed when you came? giacinto:	no, i don’t think she had much to pack anyhow. our cloths on the back i guess she might have had something else, but i don’t remember, that i wouldn’t remember. janet:	do you remember leaving your town of arsita? do you remember the actual departure? giacinto:	yes. janet:	what was that like for you? giacinto:	my grandfather, excuse me please.  janet:	that’s okay.  giacinto:	my grandfather came with us to naples. it almost killed him to see us go. janet:	how did you go to naples? did you go by train? giacinto:	we went by train. he said to my mother, “i lost three sons” because he had three sons that was in this country here. i never felt as bad. janet:	you were very close to your grandfather? giacinto:	yes, like i said, my grandfather didn’t have much but whatever he had it was ours. janet:	do you feel as though you take after your grandfather in any ways? giacinto:	i don’t know, as far as i would say we were brought up on respect. i think that we still carried, the family still carries that but i can’t remember anything else. janet:	do you remember the name of the ship that you came on? giacinto:	president wilson. of course this i found out later on from my dad because at that time i didn’t know anything. i didn’t know president wilson from statue of liberty. janet:	do you remember your accommodations on the ship? giacinto:	yeah, we had first class, nice room, beautiful. we were in steerage one room there was about 20 beds. everybody laying in one, the women would lay here i mean was in this section here. the men was on the other side of the section, there was a partitioned off.  janet:	you weren’t with your mother then? giacinto:	yeah, i was with my mother, we had a little bunk with my mother. we were full of hell, me and my brother because we were coming my brother -i was 11, my brother was seven. we used to go up on the deck, up on the ship.  my mother used to say, “i can’t get out of bed, watch your step.” she didn’t try to hold us down there, she couldn’t, i couldn’t stay in the same place day in and day out. we used to go up and down on the deck.  this day, we were up on top there, it was a little windy and i had a little hat on. a gust of wind came and took my hat and blew it into the ocean, it’s out in the atlantic some place.  oh my god i ran down to my mother, “mom you’re going to kill me, i know you’re going to kill me now.” she says, “what happened? where is your brother?” that’s the first thing that came on her mind, “where is your brother?” i said, “he is here, i’ve lost my hat.” “to hell with the hat as long as your brother is all right.” janet:	did you take care of your brother? were you kind of…? giacinto:	yeah, he was with me, i was talking care of him. me and my brother had a little fun coming here until we docked here. we docked in [inaudible 00:36:34].  the first time when we docked we saw a colored- i don’t know if i could use this phrase, a colored or a negro person. by that time after we’d docked my mother was up a little bit and my brother said, “i think he forgot to wash his face.”  while they were unloading the ship then a couple of the longshoreman, they were downstairs in the hold. [inaudible 00:37:22] a bag of walnuts, they gave us a couple of walnuts. he says, “go over there and eat them, but don’t show anybody because i’m not supposed to give you anything.” we were children but we used to get around. janet:	do you remember the statue of liberty? giacinto:	i saw the statue of liberty but the statue of liberty to me at that time meant nothing, it was just something with a hand up and that’s it because we knew nothing about america, nothing about it. janet:	do you remember how you felt when you were just getting here? giacinto:	i told you, i looked out and i thought, i said, “i’m in jail over here. i want to go back on the other side. i want to go back to italy.” janet:	tell me about ellis island. when you first came here, what did you see and what was it like for you? giacinto:	ellis island, we came here like a bunch of hobos with a little bag on your back, a peg on a side. we came by ferry from down there we came in by ferry. i know we were here-we were quarantined here for two, three days. janet:	why was that? giacinto:	before they cleared everything up. before we were allowed to go out and everything, we slept there about two, three days, in the bunks that you have here now. i remember maybe two maybe three, at the most. janet:	do you remember what happened? giacinto:	they had to go through the procedure of -it took time to get your quarantine. i suppose you get some shots or something, but you went to an examination. number one, if there was anything wrong with you, you were turned around and went back. you was not allowed to come in.  we were in good health. after a couple of days my father came and he picked us up and he took us down to a residential area which he...  janet:	did your father come to ellis island? giacinto:	yeah, he had to be here how else could we …  janet:	do you remember seeing him here? giacinto:	yes, but the first time i took a glimpse of him was on the ship. we were up on top there and he was downstairs with the [inaudible 00:40:06]. in the later years i found out that those boats were like junk boats that used to [shuttle 00:40:14] rope and different things from the ship. he had hired that little boat for that day and just around the ship that’s how we could see him. then we saw him and we waved at him. janet:	did you recognize him? giacinto:	yeah, he recognized us sure. then we came here and then my father had to be here to go through the procedure and get us off the ship, i mean off ellis island to go. janet:	where did you go when you left ellis island?  giacinto:	he was living with my aunt and from there we went into our house and she kept us for a- i’d probably be telling a lie if i -but i don’t know exactly how long, maybe it could have been maybe a month or whatever. until our family moved out upstairs and then we took the rooms upstairs, three rooms. janet:	what town was that? giacinto:	jersey city, right down here, down in 389 4th street. i remember that, 389 4th street jersey city. the first thing i saw when i came off, i had long pants and everybody was saying, [inaudible 00:41:40]. then you make friends with the kids, it was a little tough going, to be recognized as a human being too because they looked at you and said, “you’re a foreigner.” janet:	do you remember some things that struck you as being different that you saw when you first came here? giacinto:	everything was different. janet:	is there anything in particular that stands out?  giacinto:	the first thing i saw was a couple of boys on roller skates. i said to myself i said, “well my father hasn’t seen me for a few years. here’s my chance maybe i’m going to get a pair of roller skates.” i didn’t know what they called them, but i saw kids skating. i pushed it i said, “pap, you’re going to buy me one of those?” “i’ll give you this, i’ll buy you this.” he showed me five fingers, “that’s what you’re going to get.” that was the end of the speech.  janet:	what was it like being with your father after not being around him? giacinto:	i can’t very well express myself on that because you’re glad to see him but coming from a respectable family you respected and that’s it. then …  janet:	did you start school then right away? giacinto:	we came into my aunt’s house. in those days they used to have decoration for christmas, which i didn’t know anything about. i didn’t know what they meant because we never had decorations on the other side. they had, it’s not streamers, but it’s something that opens up it goes across the room like this.  when i walked in i said, “what the hell is that?” i didn’t say it in english because i didn’t know how to say ‘yes’ in english. i said, “i don’t like this place i want to go home.” then i got used to it, i started making friends. then we went to school, we got registered in school. i went to school, i was 14 years old, my birthday was in february, i was 14 and i got my working papers. janet:	how was learning english for you? was it difficult or? giacinto:	what can i say? i’ll say you were a little bit handicapped but you learned. you don’t learn perfect english right away but you managed to get along. you start to make friends with your schoolmates.  i went to school, they put me in 1a. i don’t think i was there a month, they put me in 1b because i had a little schooling from the other side, i knew a little bit. i skipped about two, three times along the line. i went to summer school, which for about six weeks or so you skip a grade. instead of playing [inaudible 00:45:38], my mother said, “go to school, go to school, go to school.” we went to summer school and we skipped a grade.  at that time we had semesters twice a year, part a and b. i was going into 6b, i went into 6b in february and i got my working papers because my birthday came on february and i got my working papers. janet:	what was your first job? giacinto:	my first job was [riggled 00:46:13] sacks, we used to make sacks in boiler bags. a factory on pacific avenue on the grand street, it used to have a factory. that’s my first job. janet:	did you stay there long? giacinto:	i stayed there about a month. a couple of my friends, [inaudible 00:46:43] from the neighborhood, they had jobs in a postal telegraph in new york. they said, “let’s come to new york, why don’t you come to new york?” i decided to go to new york with them.  new york was not what it is today but me going to new york from here, where i came from the other side go to new york. i was just like a fly on a field there because how did i know about new york? i didn’t know how to get around, i didn’t know. anyhow i managed. we used to deliver telegrams. we used to get two and a half cents apiece. the first day i think i made about 40 cents. as i gradually worked i made a little bit more. i was there about two and a half years. janet:	did you have any telegrams that you delivered that stand out in your mind? giacinto:	we didn’t read the telegrams. all we done was they had clocks. you’d be in the office. you’d be sitting down, maybe six or seven kids. we had rotations, you’d come in and you sit down, you know who you’re following when you come in.  it used to be a little clique and we each had a number and that would tell you what office to go. it got to the point after a while, you stay there long enough you get to know all these offices by numbers.  there’s one stands out in my mind, 422. we used to go [inaudible 00:48:56] 422, now that was an office that i had to go about five blocks for a telegram. nobody wanted to because you got to run five blocks, run back the five block for two and a half cents. if you get a dozen of those in a day what the hell, you don’t make nothing.  everybody says, “it’s your turn.” they said to me, i said, “okay i’ll go.” i went and i come back with 22 telegrams in one shot, that was, let’s say 22, 44, its 55 cents. were they jealous, were they mad. later on in the daytime that 422 came in again [inaudible 00:50:04]. it was my time to go out, i run out. i come back with another 15 or 20 because at that time the only communication you had was telegrams. after that, when that box went 422 everybody wanted to run but they come back with one or two. i pulled one over on them. janet:	we got about seven minutes left. why don’t you briefly tell other jobs that you had? giacinto:	then from there i went to continental can, i worked there a while. i went to pennsylvania railroad, i started at pennsylvania railroad i was 17 years old. i worked there two and a half years and i got out of there. my father was working for the lehigh valley railroad on a tugboat.  in 1929, my father got me to go with him on a job on tugboats. after me breaking in for about two weeks which you had to break in as a fireman and i got a job, i got a job there. i started april 19 1929 and i worked about two or three months.  the end of september, the early part of october the market crushed and i lost my job. from then on, was a very hard seven years, nobody expected to be as bad as it was. there was a few suicides, people jumping out of buildings because they’d lost everything they had in the market.  it kept on getting worse, worse and worse. banks start to fail, i had a few dollars i had saved and took it out of the bank and i put it in a post office because that time you was able to put it in a post office just like it’s a safe keeping. the government they gave you a receipt once you put it in. the banks was failing left and right.  in 1932, my wife was keeping me company at that time i said, “before i lose all the money,” we decided to get married, we figured, this has got to end up sometime. at that time in 1932 i had a job. i was making $9a week. she was working in the laundry. she was making $8 a week.  we had money for the furniture and things like that, we got married. we figured with $21, you don’t get the best but you manage to get along. which was a big mistake because for the simple reason that things got worse instead of better. in 1933, my first son was born. janet:	what was your wife’s name? giacinto:	laura. janet:	her maiden name? giacinto:	[belino 00:54:24]. janet:	your first son’s name? giacinto:	john. michael is here with me today. janet:	you have two sons? giacinto:	three.  janet:	what’s the …? giacinto:	robert joseph is here. my son was born in 1933, i wasn’t working. 1933 in one year, the year of 1933 i had three days’ pay, three days. in those days you had no unemployment, you had no health care. you had a job you ate, if you didn’t have a job it was tough, very tough.  janet:	how did you get along? giacinto:	how i got along, it so happened that my dad had bought a house that almost killed him, he had bought a house in 1928. that’s still the house i’m living in now. my family moved out and we lived in these rooms.  we were making a few dollars when we first got married, we were making $21. well between [inaudible 00:55:54] for a while we were paying $25 a month rent because it wasn’t that my father couldn’t afford to keep me there for nothing.  he had a mortgage to pay, he had insurance to pay, he had taxes to pay. he couldn’t expect it from [inaudible 00:56:12] i used to give him $25 a month when i was able to. when i wasn't able to i’d say, “well pap you have to wait.” it so happened that my father, if you worked for a railroad in those days you had a steady job. he worked on the tugboats like i did because he got me the job there. he was making five dollars and 75 cents a day. let’s put it this way, we managed.  there was a time i got as far as owing him over $1000 in rent. i used to paint a room and he’s say, “well take $10 off what you owe me.” things like that and we managed, we were always a close-knit family.  as bad as i had it, there were people much worse than i was. people selling apples on a corner. there was no such a thing as welfare, you had nothing. if you didn’t have anything you starved that’s all, that was it, it was up to you. there’d be times i didn’t have five cents in my pocket, it was three of us in the family.  janet:	we’re just about out of time. let me ask you, how do you think it affected you, starting out in italy, coming here as an 11 year old, going through the depression? what effect do you think all that had on you? giacinto:	i’ll tell you, the effect that it has is that i found out one thing, patience, hard work and study will get you somewhere. you have the opportunity. the little bit i learned in school was very little because any learning i did was later on through corresponding courses, things like that. i was able to get my marine engineers license. i worked in the harbor here for the lehigh valley railroad for 45 years seniority, i retired 45 years seniority. i didn’t work 45 years for them steady, but in between that’s what where worked from the beginning to the end.  janet:	is there anything you’d like to say before we close? any last statement? giacinto:	what can i say? i can say is that i’m thankful i’m in this country. this is the land of opportunity, if you have the patience and you have the goal to go out study. work for everything and don’t expect anything for nothing. janet:	let’s stop there. i want to thank you very much for a most interesting interview. giacinto:	thank you. janet:	i’m talking with giacinto …  giacinto:	di giacinto. janet:	di giacinto who came here from italy when he was 11 years old in 1920. this is janet levine for the national park service. i’m signing off. thank you. giacinto:	thank you.    