 janet:	this is janet levine for the national park service. i’m here today at the daughters of miriam in clifton, new jersey. it’s july 27th 1993. i’m here with two sisters, who came from poland in 1920. anna goodkind rosenberg was 14 when she came through ellis island and her sister rae goodkind dunkelman. anna:	we didn’t came just together, we came with our mother. we were three sisters, one lives in florida, the younger one than us. janet:	i’m going to ask you all about that. anyway, rae was 16 when she came through ellis island. we’re here today with kevin daley who’s the recording engineer and karen spizer who is the director of development and community relations here at the daughters of miriam and keith rizwitsch from the herald news is also here today.  i want to say that i’m very much looking forward to hearing your story about life in poland, about the decision to come here and about your experiences at ellis island. also after you settled here in america. let’s start at the beginning, anna would you say your birth date? anna:	birth date? janet:	your birth date? anna:	march the 6th. janet:	the year? anna:	1906. janet:	dunkelman, your birth date? dunkelman:	december the 14th.  janet:	the year? dunkelman:	1904. janet:	the town that you were born in anna? anna:	łódź, poland. janet:	do you remember that very well? did you live in łódź the whole time until you left for america? anna:	no. we had to leave łódź in the war in 1914, was very bad. most houses were bombed by the russians came in. i mean the germans came in, in the first world war, 1914 when the war broke out. my father came before, my father left us. it got very bad in poland, he couldn’t make a living and it was very bad. we had owned a house with a partner, a big house, a brick house. big city all brick houses and he couldn’t make a living.  my father had here a sister, no my mother’s sister. she also came because it was very difficult to make a living in poland and russia was very bad. when they came i wasn’t even born yet, my mother’s sister was married she came here with her husband and the husband’s big family came and also for the same reason because you couldn’t live in poland and russia. janet:	what did your father do before? anna:	my father, we had a grocery store …  dunkelman:	it was a business. anna:	he used to be an agent, he took orders from groceries and he went to the wholesalers and ordered all the grocery stuff. not vegetables but dry things, rice, coffee beans, sold everything but the groceries that was needed. he gave orders. janet:	let me ask dunkelman. dunkelman what do you remember about your father’s grocery store business? dunkelman:	i remember my mother was a sales girl. they sold coffee and [inaudible 00:04:10] the stuff, my father was outside. they were small. they didn’t know nothing about things like that. janet:	what was your father’s name? anna:	joseph dunkelman:	joe. janet:	your mother’s name? anna:	sarah. janet:	her maiden name? anna:	[sux 00:04:31]. janet:	you had one sister? dunkelman:	two sisters, one born here. anna:	we were three sisters, then one was born in america but we came the three sisters. we were supposed to come six …  janet:	i wanted to say that rae is facing me across the table is on the microphone to my right. anna is on the microphone to my left. we were talking about your father and his grocery business and your mother worked also. anna:	my mother, she had a lot of children, six children already but she helped in the grocery store. they took somebody in the house for the children. janet:	to take care of the children? anna:	sure, my mother would help in the store. janet:	describe the house that you lived in? dunkelman:	the last house was on governor street. anna:	not down, europe she’s talking, you’re talking about europe?  janet:	yeah. anna:	the house was a very big, all big houses, was a big city, no little houses. janet:	what was it made of? anna:	brick. janet:	was it a whole house or part of a house? anna:	they built a house with a big place to go in because they use horses and wagons. big stones is in the yard, they make it in two parts. they made the place to go into the yard with the horse and wagons because there they have toilets in the yard. dunkelman:	like a big yard which they had two [inaudible 00:06:26]. anna:	they come and take this out, they use it for fertilization. they take this, they come in, they have a -every house is built in a place to go and wait right here’s to go in the houses and the front stores, were stores a lot of stores. my father had it with a partner. janet:	what did people do mostly for work in that…? anna:	this place where we come from was all industries, like paterson was silk city, over there they have a lot of textile. that time they didn’t have no silk, everything was made from wool and cotton, i believe.  there was big factories also but everybody wanted to make a living, so they learned the trade weaving. they bought themselves a few looms. somebody gave them the stuff to make the materials and they made materials such as big shawls, [inaudible 00:07:44] shawls.  shawls they were wearing, they didn’t have much coats those years but everything big in the winter, every woman had a big shawl like a blanket looked with fringes, plaits, beautiful.  most people were in business because it was too bad to go to work for somebody else they couldn’t get no job, so they learned and they worked for themselves. very poor, no electricity, they worked by a candle or by a kerosene lamp, they used kerosene. they were so poor they didn’t even have money for kerosene and for candles.  they worked many hours and in the end of the week they hardly get any money to -they used to buy everything from the book in the groceries, they didn’t have no money. they needed a lot of stuff. they had a lot of children.  [inaudible 00:08:44] out money everything they came to buy, everything is not packaged, it’s in ballet bags. everything, all kinds of rice and beans, everything, coffee, everything comes in big ballet bags.  then you come in, you ask for a pound, two pounds or half a pounds, they have a little shovel, they put it in the paper bag and they weigh it. everything is weighed.  janet:	do you remember anything dunkelman about the store? dunkelman:	the store? janet:	yeah. dunkelman:	yeah, i remember some things but not too much. janet:	did you do chores around the store? anna:	no, we didn’t …   dunkelman:	we were small [inaudible 00:09:28] …  anna:	we were young, very young. dunkelman:	i was young girl. anna:	i was there maybe when they have i was maybe five years, six years, the most six years. when my father left i was about seven years. janet:	were there jewish people and were there non-jewish people living in your neighborhood? anna:	mostly jewish and some polacks.  dunkelman:	more jewish. anna:	mostly jewish. janet:	did you get along well? anna:	we wanted to get along well but the polacks are very big anti-semitics. no good. janet:	you personally experienced some feeling like that? anna:	when my father used to go in to the synagogue, they went the polacks and they threw stones. they got them with the stone in the head and everything and everybody like this. janet:	were you a religious family? anna:	very religious. dunkelman:	orthodox. janet:	how did you observe your religion when you were in poland? what did you do to observe? dunkelman:	we went to school, but the polacks people they came into the store and they started taking cigarettes, they were stealing and we were …  anna:	every store was closed down on friday afternoon, every store. then opened up saturday night, they came, the polacks. as i told you we had everything in ballet bags. they came in and they could grab a bag with anything, rice or whatever thing was in the bag and they walked out. we could do nothing to that, could do nothing. what we’re going to do? janet:	was there police? were you aware of police? anna:	they didn’t do nothing. janet:	do you remember things that your mother cooked when you were little girls in łódź? anna:	yeah sure. janet:	what dishes do you remember? anna:	they cooked very good …  dunkelman:	my mother knows how to cook [inaudible 00:11:44] …  anna:	everything. dunkelman:	chicken soup and she made all kind of stuff. the [inaudible 00:11:51] fish she made herself. anna:	she was baking good. then she had the girl that took care of everything and if not she did it. i was even maybe 10 years old i was a good cook, europe, i knew everything. janet:	do you still cook some of those things that you cooked way back then? anna:	yeah. dunkelman:	we make stuffed cabbage. anna:	my grandchildren they love it. also they love my food even now i have a grandson, a doctor. i have a granddaughters …   janet:	we’re going to talk about that later. let’s say, did you go to school when you were in poland? anna:	no, i didn’t go to school. janet:	dunkelman you didn’t either? dunkelman:	[huh 00:12:43]? janet:	go to school? dunkelman:	yeah, hebrew school. janet:	hebrew school? anna:	i didn’t go to school because i was young. then the war broke out right away and there was no life, no, we had to hide. we had to leave the city and go to a small town because the germans came in, they bombed and we lost everything. my father was in america and we were six children, the youngest was not even a year old. janet:	dunkelman did you go to school for a few years? dunkelman:	[huh 00:13:21]? janet:	you were a few years older so did you go to school for a while? dunkelman:	i went in hebrew school, in europe. janet:	yeah, tell me what that was like? what do you remember about that? dunkelman:	i didn’t even want to go because my father they made me go. he was busy in the store, so i stopped going all together. i didn’t go much there. janet:	did you learn hebrew? dunkelman:	yeah, i learned. janet:	do you remember when the war started? when the bombing started? dunkelman:	my father left because he didn’t want to go to the army, so he left and he went to this country. my mother had a sister here, so he [inaudible 00:14:09] from europe and went to this country.  then [inaudible 00:14:13] were left in the house by ourself and the war broke out. they start shooting the windows. me and my two brothers were in the room. after that the windows were broken, everything, so we had to leave. we went to my mother’s sister. it was very bad. janet:	was your mother sister in the same town? anna:	yeah my mother had …  dunkelman:	a large …  anna:	my mother had two sisters. dunkelman:	after that my [inaudible 00:14:49] had a sister in a little country called [inaudible 00:14:53], like a little country. my aunt had a butcher store too, so we went there and we stay there till after that my father sent for us to come to this country. janet:	what happened then? you went to your mother’s sister’s house? then how long did you stay? anna:	we were separated. everybody lives in one room in europe.  dunkelman:	we were separated, we didn’t have -they have [inaudible 00:15:27] girls. anna:	when i talk you don’t talk, because it’s no good, you talk, you talk and it’s no good. janet:	one at a time. anna:	let me talk or you talk. janet:	anna, what you were saying. anna:	what were we up to? janet:	you were saying that after you went …  anna:	she went with a younger sister to my mother’s sister. we were six children, we couldn’t go into one family because they had their own children, they lived in one room. i went with my youngest brother. he was a baby to my grandmother, my mother’s mother. i stayed there for many years, i stayed with my grandmother. janet:	what was your grandmother’s name? anna:	her second name was [sux 00:16:20], but the first name was rachael. janet:	what do you remember about her? do you remember sometimes with her? anna:	yes she was a very quiet woman. she was a very religious woman. if she only could spare a few little money, she would go to the rabbi and give it to the rabbi. she would take it off from her food and she always believed in the rabbis.  she used to go consult everything with the rabbi. before she made a decision, anything, to move or anything she went to the rabbi. whatever the rabbi told her to do she did. janet:	do you remember any things that she taught you that she wanted you to learn? anna:	i learned it myself, nobody taught me. i kicked up to be religious and very kosher and everything and the rest didn’t. nobody told me how to be, i wanted to be like this. i learned it from my parents and from my grandmother, i didn’t go to the new style i’m still like this and none of them are like this. janet:	where did you go dunkelman when your family had to split up? who did you go to live with? dunkelman:	we went to the country, the little country my grandmother was there and my mother’s sister. i went to somebody to help them out, i was young that time. i didn’t have anywhere to go because they didn’t have enough room …  anna:	we had to separate, we had to be separated. dunkelman:	i stayed there till we went then we got a room [inaudible 00:18:13] that room there. janet:	were you with any of your brothers and sisters? dunkelman:	[huh 00:18:20]? janet:	were your brothers and sisters with you? anna:	no. dunkelman:	no we all were separated, no. anna:	they practically didn’t have where to stay, they stayed in any place the two brothers, they were older than us. we were the youngest the girls, so i stayed with my grandmother as long as i could. they just were in the street, they didn’t have where to be, the two brothers. janet:	the two brothers were in the street? you were with your grandmother, rae was with …   anna:	was with my mother’s sister. dunkelman:	then we were together after that. janet:	for several years? anna:	yeah. then it got very bad in the big city, no food, the germans came in. the germans took over russia, they came in the germans. the big houses was broken and everybody left everything, they didn’t care for anything we just wanted to save ourselves. we were looking for food, where to hide, so wherever somebody could hide. we had a little country with my mother’s family. my mother’s sister lived there. we went there and then we got the room and just a very small town. each house was just a room, it was a small village. beautiful village, very nice, but very poor, everybody very poor. it was the country, we were now to pick berries, we went to the forest to pick mushrooms, was beautiful there. janet:	do you remember the name of that place? anna:	yeah. it was called [inaudible 00:20:10]. janet:	can you spell it? anna:	i can’t spell it, [inaudible 00:20:14], was a small town. janet:	you have fond memories of that place? you have fond memories of [inaudible 00:20:23]? anna:	it’s all the thing of all my eyes, i was very young. then my mother was very sick, she was sick a long time. she got sick on her foot with arthritis or something. we didn’t have no father, no mother we stayed with the family.  then my mother got a little bit healthy she started to smuggle. we didn’t have a lot to smuggle. there was nothing to be gotten, no flour, no anything. she managed, she find out in another town they have got sugar and there was sugar in our place. she took a few pounds of sugar and went on a train and tried to find a baker or somebody to buy it. there was [00:21:03] customers.  [inaudible 00:21:07] this place she had she used to buy there and bring it to us and sell it and make a few pennies. we had family in that town too so my mother slept over to get the train. you weren’t allowed to sell it, weren’t allowed to bring from one place to another, weren’t allowed but she did, if the police caught her they took her away and she lost it. janet:	she travelled by herself then? by train and …  anna:	took a train and went to another town. that town was occupied by the austrians so it was better. it was no more russian, it was either german or austrian. it was much better than with the polacks and with the -that those years the germans were our friends, those years in the first world war, they trusted us. janet:	your mother was smuggling right up until you left for america? anna:	yeah. janet:	that was what she was doing? anna:	yeah, made very little money. my two brothers they were older they got themselves a job in a lumber yard, they were very young boys. they wanted to make some little money. in the summer they worked outside, cutting the boards and everything and making them in the lumber yard. they have to make it straight to cut the boards so they were sewed like this two young boys. they came over later, we didn’t come together, just my mother and the three girls and the youngest brother. the two were left in europe. janet:	did you mother and father communicate with each other when he was in america? anna:	no, communication. we weren’t allowed to write letters. because in the war time there was no writing letters, weren’t allowed. after they stopped, my mother had an address my father couldn’t write to us because we didn’t live no more in the town he couldn’t find us. my mother wrote a letter and told him what happened.  my mother said, “we have no more house, don’t come home.” my father made ready papers and he sent for us. he wasn’t even a citizen yet but a wife and children could come to a husband even if he wasn’t a citizen. otherwise you had to be citizen to bring over somebody from europe, had to be a citizen but he wasn’t. janet:	when the decision was made to leave for america, do you remember packing up anything? anna:	yeah. there was a certificate, birth certificate. we’re born in the big city. my mother left us in the town here and she went in the big city to get together the birth certificates. of course they have to have birth certificates to make passports. she went she got together the birth certificates. janet:	rae, do you remember anything your mother packed to take with you? anna:	we didn’t have much to pack dunkelman:	we didn’t have nothing. anna:	we didn’t have anything. my father didn’t send much money. all through the years my mother didn’t have money to buy, so we didn’t have nothing. we came almost …  dunkelman:	i remember on the train we went with the train. janet:	you went from the little village where you were living then you went to by train? dunkelman:	yeah, we went by train. anna:	we had to go back to the big city. dunkelman:	my mother gave me to hold her little basket that had a few dollars. she says, “they might take it away from me, so when they come to look what you got there just hold it like this.” i was holding the money, not much money, in my hands. i went over to the desk and they looked but [inaudible 00:25:29]. janet:	you took a train then and where did the train take you? anna:	we waited till everything got ready. she had to go to warsaw to …  dunkelman:	i had to get...  anna:	for the council. i didn’t go because…  dunkelman:	a passport. anna:	i was 14 years, i didn’t need no passport, she needed. janet:	where did you go after you left when you had your papers? anna:	when everything was ready my mother got the passports. first she had to go for the warsaw from the council. janet:	then when she got them then what? anna:	then she arrived and we tried to get a train to go out from poland but we couldn’t get no trains. we had to be in, where to catch a train, so just had to be in the stations to wait for a train.  we went to germany first. it doesn’t take long, but because we didn’t get straight transportation, we had to get off of the train. we had to wait for trains took a long time. we didn’t have no food, my mother bought bread and she had a knife. gave us a piece of bread like for breakfast or for lunch or for supper, we had for weeks and weeks we had a piece of bread nothing else.  then we got ourself in germany was not far from poland. in germany everything was wonderful because the war was in our side not in their side. they came to us, to ruin everything. for us everything got broken but russian didn’t get into germany so everything was wonderful.  when we came there it was like that day and night, we in poland didn’t have nothing they had everything. we slept over one night in a hotel and then we started to go to holland. janet:	do you remember germany dunkelman? do you remember germany when you were going to holland to catch the boat? dunkelman:	i don’t remember, no. anna:	we didn’t go out we just slept over, we were interested. we didn’t have no money, what you’re going to do? janet:	you got another train? anna:	yeah. then it was better when we got ourselves to germany it was better, we went to holland. in holland we had to wait weeks for a boat and many, many people. janet:	were you examined there? anna:	a lot examining doctors, yeah. janet:	you remember the examinations? dunkelman:	they examined us and they took all the clothes off and they …  anna:	gave us showers. dunkelman:	we went in the bath tub. i took everything off and i remember my younger sister, how old this time? maybe 10 years old. me and my sister went into the bath tub and they gave us soap to wash in here. anna:	they didn’t get us towel. dunkelman:	the soap got into her eyes and they didn’t give you no towels, no nothing. anna:	they soaped us up and they didn’t give us no towel. dunkelman:	i washed her head and the soap running dry and she was crying.  then they took a very cloth and [inaudible 00:29:06]. anna:	we needed the …  dunkelman:	[inaudible 00:29:08] …  anna:	for weeks and weeks we didn’t change no clothes dunkelman:	that’s what they did then to everybody. anna:	we didn’t have clothes. we didn’t change no clothes for weeks and weeks till we came to america janet:	what was the ship then that you got? the name of it? dunkelman:	[inaudible 00:29:23] but very bad, the tables were turning over. janet:	i think what we’ll do here is pause. then we’ll continue after a break about the trip, ellis island and coming to america. this is janet levine for the national park service and we’re continuing now.  i’m speaking with anna rosenberg and her sister dunkelman dunkelman who came from poland in 1920. anna is on the microphone to then left of me, facing me. dunkelman is on the microphone to the right of me. we were talking about getting on the boat, what do you remember dunkelman about being on the ship? dunkelman:	i remember nothing. anna:	you were sick. dunkelman:	i was in the hospital all the time, throwing up. they gave you good food. i looked at the food i feel like throwing up. she walked around and she ate everything, i couldn’t eat nothing. till the boat stopped i was in the hospital. janet:	were you way down in steerage in the bottom of the boat [inaudible 00:30:38]? anna:	[inaudible 00:30:39] was here and …  dunkelman:	we were all in the back. anna:	very bad boat for the third class it was. it was first class, third class, we were in the third class was bad. janet:	it was a big dormitory like or was it a cabin that you slept in? anna:	was a big boat, lot of people and crowded, very crowded. the boat stopped in ireland and picked up some people there. we passed around there and some irish people came up. they were dancing, they were full of fun but we were very sick in the boat. janet:	did you go to the dining room? did you …? dunkelman:	yeah, they gave us good food. we thought we would never have it anymore, we start hiding the bread. because we didn’t know we’re going to get food here. because we never saw a boat, they used in the old country the boat. they baked the bread from the peel form the potatoes, they made bread, we couldn’t get bread. janet:	do you remember when the boat came into the new york harbor? remember seeing new york from the boat? dunkelman:	people would stand downstairs and other people look to be [inaudible 00:32:08] my father there  janet:	where did you see your father where was he? dunkelman:	they were waiting for us, the boat stopped. then they let us off and then they were waiting, my father was in -they interview 00:32:24 my father. then they opened up the gate and we were now with my father. janet:	that was ellis island? dunkelman:	yeah, ellis island. anna:	a lot of them are sitting and they asked us if we know how to read. we were reading something, there were all kind of languages, but we read what we could. janet:	what else did they ask you? anna:	pardon? janet:	what else were you asked? anna:	this i don’t remember.  janet:	what else do you remember about ellis island?  anna:	i think we slept over. didn’t we sleep over in ellis island? i think we slept over because we were waiting for the father and this and that till somebody, there was other people.  dunkelman:	it was lively, they were dancing and singing all the people, it was very nice. anna:	too much about ellis island i don’t remember, we were interested very much to see my father. janet:	what was it like when you saw him? anna:	we didn’t know nothing how he looks, anything like that, we didn’t know nothing. my mother had to say, “this is the father.” we didn’t know.  because he changed, europe he was just different, in europe he had a little beard. in america he didn’t have no beard, he dressed american clothes and he gained weight. he looked different than we thought.  plus, we don’t remember nothing from europe because we were young, my father get up very early morning to go for business. when he came back we were asleep already, we didn’t remember him much, we didn’t see him. janet:	dunkelman did you remember your father? dunkelman:	we looked up and we saw that my father, he looked different. he wasn’t religious like he was in europe, another difference. janet:	when you were released from ellis island, where did you go? anna:	we went to my mother sister’s house. janet:	where was that? anna:	in paterson. she lived in a big house and they were very nice to us. they lived in one family house, the girls had friends so they went to sleep at their friends they gave us their bedrooms because we came we- were four children, we were six but two had to be left over in europe. janet:	it was the two of you? anna:	three sisters and a little brother, we came. we stayed for my aunt’s house. they had to give us clothes, we didn’t have any clothes from top to bottom, they gave us clothes. they gave us the bathroom to bath ourself and everything. then they bought some things for us that helped us.  janet:	did you go to school? dunkelman:	night school, i remember night school. anna:	we learned how to work, my father had with a partner some looms that they made material weaving. he taught us the trade, i was very young i couldn’t reach the -i had to stay on a bench to do the work. janet:	he taught you how to weave on the loom in your house? in your aunt’s house? anna:	no, he had a shop with a partner. we learned there and it take some time and we were very poor, our father didn’t have much money till we learned. then we got a little money we start to buy things. we all got together, my mother got looms, my father got looms for us. it was hard to get looms in paterson, very hard. janet:	did your mother and your sister, and both of you were you all working with the looms? anna:	not my mother, just i, one sister and the little brother and the little sister went to school they were very young. i and my sister learned how to weave, how to work and take some time till we know. janet:	what was night school like for you? anna:	what? janet:	the night school? anna:	night school? janet:	yeah. anna:	it was a nice up main street in paterson. it was a high school but in the night they had teachers teaching the immigrants. we went from seven i think till nine i think it was. janet:	do you remember how you were taught? what they did …  anna:	they taught us how to sing the, my country, tis of thee and we started to learn. dunkelman:	[inaudible 00:37:32]. anna:	we started to learn like a style of like the little babies, from the beginning we didn’t know nothing, we had to start to write. because we didn’t have much schooling in europe so we had -my sister and my little brother went to school. they learned very good, they were smart and everything. they learned in four years my sister graduated, she made it in four years. janet:	did you both keep working in your father’s shop? did you ever have other jobs? dunkelman:	she worked in different place. i then start working with my uncle. he had looms there, so i learned there to work. then i try pawn jobs, i had [inaudible 00:38:20]. anna:	even we knew how to get around, we knew a little bit english,  dunkelman:	i worked till 65, i worked. janet:	work on the looms? dunkelman:	[inaudible 00:38:28], yeah. janet:	did you always work with the looms? dunkelman:	[huh 00:38:32]? janet:	were you always working on the looms? dunkelman:	yeah, that’s all i did. janet:	how did you meet your husband? dunkelman:	my husband, we were in the same neighborhood, in the same club we used to go. i belonged to the [inaudible 00:38:47], so that’s how i met him. janet:	what neighborhood? dunkelman:	[huh 00:38:52] janet:	in paterson? dunkelman:	yeah. janet:	you have a social club? dunkelman:	a what? janet:	a social club. anna:	they had a lot of clubs. dunkelman:	yeah, social club. anna:	a lot of clubs. we belonged living in [inaudible 00:39:06], we went, you enjoy yourself. like now with this, we went for trips, the camps, because we worked and made a little money. in four years my parents bought a house.  in four years my parents bought a two family house, a nice two family house. my mother saved up a little money to buy furniture, everything was all cash. the house we only paid in a little money. was a beautiful house. janet:	how did you meet your husband anna? anna:	i went back to europe 1929. janet:	you went to poland? anna:	went to poland. janet:	why did you go back? anna:	i knew a boy, it was a family boy. i went back and i got married there. i came back in a year, around 1930 i came back. janet:	the man you married, had he been in the united states too? anna:	when i married him we both came, i was a citizen. 1930 i came back -i was there a year in poland.7 janet:	you went back to poland to marry him? anna:	because i had a lot of family there and we loved each other. it was always my home, the family, my mother’s sister’s, they had children my age, her age. we got together, very much close together.  i said i’m going home when i said -we didn’t like poland but me i said i’m going home because in the kind of family, i had a lot of family there. janet:	was your grandmother still there? anna:	my grandmother came to america a little before we came with my grandfather.  we have the family here and the sister so they brought them over. my uncle, two uncles came themselves after we came, they came. they had big business but they left everything they came to america they were smart people. janet:	they all settled in paterson? anna:	yeah, they lived in paterson  janet:	when you went back home to poland did you go in order to marry your husband? is that why you went to? anna:	yeah, i went back. i stayed with my mother’s sister, i stayed. i got married there and then i came with my husband to america. janet:	what did your husband do here? anna:	my husband, his parents had a bakery in europe and he was a baker. he went did the same thing in america. janet:	he was a baker here too? dunkelman:	yeah, till he died he was a baker. janet:	how about your husband dunkelman? what did your husband do? dunkelman:	he worked for his uncle the textile upholstery. then the uncle went bankrupt he went to insurance, to [inaudible 00:42:18] insurance. he was a salesman there. janet:	did you have children? dunkelman:	i got two daughters. janet:	their names? dunkelman:	one lives on arizona now, she got two boys and she lives in tucson, arizona janet:	what’s her name? dunkelman:	helena herkimer. janet:	your other child? dunkelman:	[huh 00:42:49]? janet:	you have two? dunkelman:	one lives in new york. janet:	who is that? dunkelman:	nevada, she’s not married, dunkelman. janet:	how about you anna? anna:	i have a son and a daughter. my daughter lives in [inaudible 00:43:03]. janet:	he name? anna:	sherwad herman. my son lives in new city, melvin rosenberg. janet:	you have grandchildren? anna:	he has two sons. my daughter has a son and a daughter, they’re married, she has a grandchild, a grandson and i have a great grandson. janet:	how are you enjoying this phase of your life? anna:	this? janet:	now? anna:	not good. janet:	why?  anna:	because we alone, we have no husbands, children are busy with their families and we don’t feel well. our friends died and we are like this. we didn’t live a rich life but we lived with people together, belonging, going together, all the time all in groups. everything with people that we belonged together. janet:	how about you dunkelman? do you think about the old times very much nowadays? do you think about when you were a little girl and your life before? dunkelman:	i don’t think about that. janet:	no? dunkelman:	no. janet:	what makes you feel proud that you did in your life? anna:	proud, what did you do good? what do you remember good about your life? dunkelman:	not much. anna:	struggling, working hard, struggling. dunkelman:	work hard all my life. janet:	when you first came to this country, did people treat you badly because you were immigrants, the greenhorns? did you run into any of that? anna:	we weren’t used to get anything. we knew we have to work for everything, no matter how. we weren’t used to good, so we didn’t have it good here and we didn’t mind it. we liked it because it wasn’t like anti-semitics, we were free, you felt yourself free.  we work with all kinds of people, nationalities over years with people. [inaudible 00:45:37] people but we worked with all kind of people and we got along very good. i have nothing to complain in america. i worked for everything and proud of it.  we didn’t expect anything. we wanted till we were able to buy. then we bought, we bought for cash no paying out, we don’t owe anybody any money. that’s what our pleasure, nobody came to the door knocking that we owe them money, if i didn’t have money i didn’t buy. when i had money i went to store and bought with cash. if a little money for cash, i never owned a house. janet:	how about you dunkelman, is there anything you’d like to say about coming to america as a girl and living most of your life out here? dunkelman:	i was very happy now that i’m here, but i had a lot of friends before, they’re all came to the other side. some of them are here, some of then passed away. now the russian came in, russian people, most of them are russian people now. you got to talk russian, since a lot of them don’t talk jewish. anna:	its different now, we lost the old friends. they were much older than us mixed, i didn’t care mixed. i belonged to societies and i liked the people. i looked up to them because they were working people and they were satisfied, never complaining, all working people.  some of them became bosses their own business. my brothers they had a little printing shop. one of them had a little bakery but they died, they moved to california here, to florida, i have two sisters in florida. janet:	is there anything else you’d like to say before we close, before we finish? is there anything else you would like to say? anna:	not much. i told you we live on the social security, we work no relief, then proud of it. never took the relief, i don’t anybody any money that’s my pleasure. i’m proud what i had was my own nobody gave me for nothing. i worked with my sweat for everything. i like it i’m used to that.  i didn’t expect anything we came, my aunt had a beautiful house, she also was poor she worked herself up in the war times. in the first world war she had it very bad also but they happened to work themselves up and they lived in a beautiful house.  we had to live in nothing a nice house when we came and we didn’t expect they should give us. we waited until we have money and then they paid into a house, a little money. we were all happy together, we were happy because we were all together, before we all separated. we had to be separated because we didn’t have [inaudible 00:49:07]. dunkelman:	i used to be a waitress in the temple [inaudible 00:49:13] for the nutrition site volunteer, 20 years i worked there. janet:	did that give you pleasure? anna:	we liked it i worked also …  janet:	did you? dunkelman:	i worked there 20 years. anna:	we liked it very much. then we can’t do it no more, my hand shakes, i can’t walk, so i gave it up. i worked till i came to the daycare i worked as a volunteer. they’re still going on the nutrition place, the temple [menu 00:49:49]. dunkelman:	i used to go to arizona every year about two three months, but since i’m sick i don’t go no place. in florida i was visit my sisters, two sisters like i say. janet:	it’s nice that you have each other. anna:	yeah. janet:	you’re close to each other. anna:	one brother just died, the youngest just died. janet:	i want to thank you very much. this has been a very interesting story.  dunkelman:	she did everything not me. janet:	yes you’re important in this too. dunkelman:	 i have a lot of trouble, its make noise in my ears. janet:	you did fine. i want to say thank you very much. i’ve been speaking with anna rosenberg and rae dunkelman. this is janet levine for the national park service, it’s july 27th 1993. i’m signing off.