 paul: 	good morning this is paul seacrest from the national park service. today is thursday september 28th, 1995. i am in jersey city, new jersey at the hamilton park health care facility. and i am here with gretchen hintze. hintze:	 hintze. paul:	 hintze hintze: 	hintze yeah. paul: 	h-i-n-t-z-e hintze: 	z-e yeah and that’s hintze. paul: 	hintze. and mrs. hintze came from germany in 1923 she believes and she thinks she was around 19 when she came. hintze: 	yeah. yeah. paul: 	mrs. hintze can we begin by you giving me your birth date? hintze:	 january the 22nd, 1904. paul: 	and where in germany were you born? hintze: 	hamburg. paul: 	yes? hintze: 	in hamburg. paul: 	can you tell me a little bit about hamburg when you were a kid, what sticks out in your mind about? hintze: 	there is [unclear 00:01:02] like new york. [unclear 00:01:08] [laughter] paul: 	that’s ok you can do that if you want. hintze:	 [unclear 00:01:17] and- paul: 	what are some of the buildings in hamburg that stick out in your mind as a child?  hintze: 	oh! there are- in the last time they builded big houses like they have here now. they started with big building houses otherwise the houses was not too big. but big in enough to live in.  paul: 	can you describe the house that you grew up in? hintze: 	let me see. yes, it was a single house that my hus-my- paul: 	father? hintze: 	no. father for the husband, he owned a house and there we was living when we got married. paul:	 where you married in germany? hintze: 	in germany. paul: 	oh! so you were married when you came to the united states? hintze:	 oh! i was still married.  paul: 	oh okay. hintze: 	yeah, yeah. i was married in germany. i had to live in my own home and my husband he was the manager in a delicatessen store. paul: 	what was your husband's name? hintze: 	hintze adolf. paul:	 adolf? hintze:	 adolf hintze. paul: 	well lets-we will get back to your husband let’s talk about your childhood first.  hintze: 	yeah. paul: 	do you know anything about when you were born? did anyone ever tell you a story about when you were born? hintze: 	no not this. but i know only that i had a very nice house as a home with my parents and the sister and brothers. paul: 	what was your father's name? hintze: 	my father's name was rudolf. paul: 	and what did he do for a living? hintze: 	he had his own store. in the house, in the front and i was there i was selling all the-because he had the bicycle or motor cycle store. and he was in the back. we had a big-where he was working. [unclear 00:03:50] they called it.  and he was working. and when the people came with bicycle to repair so i brought them in the back to my father and he was working with my oldest brother that’s his oldest son. he was working with him because he should after and he it’s normal there to take the store over o the house and everything. paul:	 what was your father’s last name? your maiden name? your name before you were married? hintze: 	oh dettmann. paul: 	can you spell that please? hintze: 	d-e-t-t-m-a-n-n dettmann. paul: 	d-e-t-t-m-a-n-n dettmann. hintze: 	yes that’s right and his name was rudolf, his first name. my father rudolf dettmann. paul: 	can you talk to me a little bit about the motorcycles and the bicycles that your father sold what you remember about? hintze: 	yeah as- he had more the bicycle than the motorcycle because motorcycle is different than a bicycle. you know what a bicycle is right? that is [unclear 00:05:23] like and has only two- paul: 	wheels. hintze: 	wheels yeah. paul: 	did you have your own bicycle as a young girl? hintze: 	no, i didn’t it was not getting on a bicycle because the one brother he had an accident on that-make me doing not to go on a bicycle. well that was alright but i sell the bicycle and i took the bicycle for repairing and brought them or let me them bringing [unclear 00:06:05] was in the back from our house. paul: 	and that’s where the bicycles were repaired? hintze: 	yeah, yeah and my father had a store and the one where i was working because my sister got married so then i came have to work i was in 17years old. and that was very first for me to do this. paul: 	so your father put his children to work in the store? hintze:	 yes that’s right. paul: 	what was your father's personality like? hintze: 	oh! he was working and working a very fine man. he likes to be good dressed as when went get out he was always dress on-i never saw him without his-what do you call them? paul: 	a tie. hintze: 	tie, without a tie, never. no matter what he is he always wear a tie and then he had a [unclear 00:07:06] paul: 	as in collar? hintze: 	collar yeah a collar and then his tie. so he was always dressed as good-so that when people came to buy or repair he was always dressed and looks good. paul:	 very presentable. hintze: 	yeah he was very [laughter] and he was always singing when he make shaving with the hair he was always singing. paul: 	do you remember any of the songs that he used to sing? hintze: 	very old songs so- paul: 	can you sing one of them for me in german? hintze: 	let me see? [singing in german 00:07:56-00:08:23] [laughter] that the way he was always singing this song. paul: 	thank you very much for singing that. what does it mean? hintze: 	that means it is a pair a man and a girl and she said that he could not [unclear 00:08:43] because he goes off with other [laughter] not with her alone. so that is sort of the story. she didn’t trust him. paul:	 i see. hintze: 	yeah. paul: 	what did you father enjoy doing when he wasn’t working? his leisure time activities? hintze: 	he had a restaurant where he always go and then there was playing to get cards so 66 that was a game but they play in the family all over and he plays this because he don’t want nothing heavy to play only for company. i remember them drinking a glass beer with this, maybe two glasses but never drunk no and he was-he was a very lively when he was standing on mirror he always his here and he was always singing [laughter]. i sing too a lot. paul: 	so he would stand in front of the mirror and hold his hair and sing? hintze: 	and called to see or make shaving and he always was singing. paul: 	what kinds of things did he do with his children? hintze: 	well, we were three boys and three girls and the boys when they get older they had to work with him in the back. and that was [unclear 00:10:32] they call it in german. paul:	but was there something fun that he did with his kids? maybe on his day off? hintze: 	no, not fun, father was very strict but he loves us all but he was very strict we could not do something that was not right. paul: 	do you remember some of the rules that you had to follow, some of your father's rules? hintze: 	we had to-in the evening to the right time going inside in the house and early to bed. paul: 	what time did you go to bed? hintze: 	well 7.30 when we were just shy as kids and when we would get older and it was a little bit later.  paul: 	let’s talk about your mother what was her name? hintze: 	my mother louise. paul: 	and what was her maiden name? hintze: 	krack paul: 	can you spell that please? hintze: 	k-r-a-c-k paul: 	krack? hintze: 	yeah. paul: 	do you know how your parents met? hintze: 	yeah. my mother was working when she came from the country there was [unclear 00:11:56] and she went to hamburg [unclear 00:12:00]. and there she was working by very rich people and my father he was a repairing like electric lights, the lamp and everything that’s electric is he was repairing this. he saw her and they fall in love. paul: 	do you know what year they got married? hintze: 	oh! that i cannot say as this was in the 1800, yeah. paul: 	can you name your brothers and sister for me? hintze:	yes. willy that was the oldest brother. then came rudy and then the other was max. paul: 	so willy, rudy and max? and then there were three girls? hintze: 	and three girls. margret her name was not margret there was-her real name was eda and she hate the name eda [laughter]. so she gave herself the name margret. paul: 	how do you spell eda? hintze:	 eda e-d-a. paul:	 okay so margret then the next one? who’s after margaret? hintze: 	then next me paul: 	you gretchen and then the youngest? hintze: 	and then one sister she was many years younger than i. thea was her name. paul: 	how do you spell that? hintze: 	t-h-e-a paul: 	and you said she was much younger that you? hintze:	yes she was year’s old-five years- paul: 	do you remember when thea was born? hintze:	not when she was born no. paul: 	okay, do you have any stories you would like to tell about your brothers and sisters when you were growing up when you were children? hintze: 	well, they had the bicycle because my father had a bicycle store. so the brother gets a bicycle if they behaves themselves he was very strict. bicycle and then sometime then they took me sometime along because then they had in the back a seat where i could seat on. my mother when she had the time she was looking out the window and when we came home she said, “
[unclear 00:14:35]” because that was so dangerous. paul: 	putting a little kid on the back of a bicycle [laughter]. were bicycles popular at this time? hintze:	 there was yeah-there was bicycle and after bicycle came the motorcycle. paul:	what about automobiles? hintze: 	oh yeah there was between the time already but not so big than they are today.  paul: 	so more people had bicycles than automobiles? hintze:	 yes that’s right, motorcycles or the bicycle. paul: 	did your family buy an automobile when you were- hintze:	 my father yes yeah. paul: 	can you tell me a little bit about when you got the automobile? hintze: 	that was not to move on but he had to repair this and the man he passed away. and the woman she don’t want the bicycle- paul: 	the automobile? the car? hintze: 	the automobile-she sell very cheap to my father. yeah that’s what i know. paul: 	she sold it cheap and he fixed it up? hintze: 	he fixed it up. paul: 	how did you feel about having a car in the family? hintze: 	well, we was not even-not even too long in the car sitting because we had to work and when we were12 or 13 we had to work because my mother she had- we call that a [unclear 00:16:22] the men who were working in the [unclear 00:16:30] for eating. i think it was 80cents the meal was good, real homemade and that was mama’s job. she had a store for people that people came for eating and then we had the whole house and the front lined up was 4-5 rooms and rented the rooms out and single man. paul:	 like a boarding house? hintze:	 like a boarding house and there was working and there was a big cemetery-not cemetery so like a hospital. very big hospital and there was working in the contour as in the [unclear 00:17:26].  and then they came five of them. there was living in the house my parents had the five rooms because that was her business. the rooms and the cooking’s. mother was a very good cook. paul: 	so she brought in extra money by taking in this men in house? hintze: 	that’s right, that’s right. paul: 	talk to me about the kinds of food that your mother made? and what was some of your favorite foods that she would make? hintze:	 [unclear 00:18:07]. paul:	 [unclear 00:18:09]. hintze: 	[unclear 00:18:10]. paul: 	can you spell that? hintze:	 meat, what’s best to say here? well i think it’s a- paul:	 meat of some sort you said meat? hintze: 	meat yeah, not cooked and-and if it’s not cooked and sliced up and then a slice of bacon and onions and then the whole- [unclear 00:18:42] too i will make it. and then you put a stick in so that it stays together and then you make all depends how many person they are. four to five and the pot you make a nice gravy. paul: 	what other kinds of foods? what would you eat for breakfast say? hintze: 	well we had to eat anything anyhow. bread and butter and little bit-the baloney- paul:	for breakfast? hintze: 	for breakfast. paul: 	what time would you eat breakfast? hintze: 	well we were spending the most time of the time to school then we got two slices along to eat in the school and with something on very good. paul: 	what time would you eat lunch? hintze: 	well when we were children we eat at lunch we ate between our break. and mother had no time for sitting down on the-because she was here cooking and the people they came in her house.  we had a big room, eating room and then they were served sitting and then i get all the other-the oldest daughter got married and i had to do it. to bring the food in and bring it to them, this was always so, 10 or 11 men- paul: 	always men? hintze: 	there was-working in the office and my mother was a good cook and not too expensive. so they came for eating they had then the meals. they had sometimes working very long.  paul: 	and they were always men, no women? hintze: 	men. no, no, no. yeah always men. paul: 	tell me about school? you mentioned school what sticks out in your mind about going to school in hamburg as a young girl? hintze:	 it was a plain school. as in german they say [unclear 00:21:23] that means people together. it was like here only here was in english and there was in germany. they were the same with reading and writing and singing and spelling. it was all the same. only german and here english. paul: 	did you enjoy school as child? hintze: 	yes we had to. oh my father was very strict and then we got another good remark. paul: 	how were your parents educated? hintze: 	my mother she came from the country, very plain but she was a cook. oh my god. paul: 	could she read and write? hintze: 	yes, yeah. paul: 	and your father the same? hintze: 	oh yeah. father had his own store as his repair store. and he i was in the store where [unclear 00:22:37] they say in german i don’t know what they would say here. that you said all this- paul: 	a shop? hintze: 	yeah he had a shop and then with all the little things that belong on the motorcycle or on the bicycle. if people come after accident then they brought us in the back there was big room there were father and one of the brothers- paul: 	they used to work on things back there? hintze: 	yeah. paul:	what religion were you? hintze: 	evangelish paul: 	evangelicals you would say that in english. hintze: 	oh say that again? paul:	 evangelical, say it in german? hintze:	 evangelish paul: 	yeah it’s the same. is that protestant? is a type, is it lutheran protestant or is it its own? hintze: 	no its- paul:	it’s a protestant. hintze: 	yeah. paul: 	tell me how you celebrate christmas as a child? hintze: 	oh that was the best [laughter]. my father he was very big in this because he likes to give and he put it everything to a nice paper, nice packet and we had to make it [unclear 00:24:14] at a time- paul:	 to wrap the presents? hintze: 	but he wants us to be because he want to see our face, how excited we was to see what is in the package. paul:	 is there a christmas present that you got as a child that sticks out in your mind, something that you still remember getting? hintze: 	not exactly, everything was good.  paul: 	how did you practice your religion at home? hintze:	 well, some day was-we had to go to church sunday morning and during the week there was a day that we had to go too, maybe afternoon. paul: 	that you remember saying as a child in german, did you learn prayers or anything like that? hintze: 	no. paul: 	tell me how you met-oh i know. tell me about world war one, tell me about the period of world war 1914, 15, 16? what do you remember about that period? hintze: 	i remember that the english came over and put bumps in the cities. that was [unclear 00:25:47] and we had to go down in the cellar to be saved onto who had not a house, they build a big building where the people then go the time over when the england was over in the air and drop the bombs. paul: 	did you see the bombs dropping? hintze:	better not because they were so exploding. if you’re not too far away you could pass away from this [unclear 00:26:32]. paul: 	did anyone in your family get hurt during the war? hintze: 	no. paul:	 did anyone have to serve in the german army during world war 1, you’re brothers or--? hintze: 	no. paul: 	do you remember perhaps food shortages at that time? hintze: 	we had no food shortages because my mother she was a cook and she cook for other people. they came as they was working in the office, i remember in the office. that was also a hospital very big hospital and they had plenty people working there and they came over to my mother to eat there. paul: 	so you always had enough to eat during the war? hintze: 	yes i can say yes. paul:	 do you remember when the war was over? do you remember when world war 1 ended? hintze:	 mmmh paul:	 what do you remember about that? hintze: 	let me see [unclear 00:27:33] i know it was all happy, that i know because we had always to go in a bunker. that was here, if you have a cellar that was supposed to be in the cellar and if not they build as a bunkers they called it. paul: 	bunkers? hintze: 	yeah, on the people went in to the banker because they were all safe so that when the bomb fear that didn’t hurt the building.  paul: 	and that’s what you remember the most about that time period as having to go into these bunkers? hintze: 	yes, because there was a [making a blowing sound 00:28:14] that was the sign of long times so then we know oh danger is coming. and then we snug, took to what we need and very important and then we went to the bunker. paul: 	tell me about how you meet the man that would become your husband? hintze: 	oh to my sister because he was in there delicatessen store and he was there the first man. and my sister she was like to talk with him and then he asked and then she said well i have not one sister then he said, “she is good looking like you?' [laughter]. “oh yes,” she said. i remember this she told me. and so we came this way together. paul: 	what were you attracted to? what did you like about your husband to be before you married him? hintze: 	well he was always happy like me and he was singing and he was interested in everything and could do everything. so repair, he had a bicycle his own bicycle, he made a-if something was wrong he repaired this other. when my father was very busy in his workshop then my helped him-when he had the time on helps him that i remember. paul: 	and how did your father feel about this- hintze:	very, he likes him very much because he saw how he is working and interested. paul:	bicycles are very important in your life aren’t they? they keep coming up. hintze: 	yes. that was the time that for the bicycle now it’s just the motorcycle. paul: 	tell me about your wedding, did you get married in hamburg? hintze: 	mmmh. paul: 	tell me what sticks out in your mind about the wedding? hintze: 	the wedding, as evangelish. and we went to the-i was in white that is here the rule in germany if it’s not now i couldn’t tell. everything the white and white dress- paul: 	could you describe what the dress looked like? hintze: 	oh beautiful. and all the way down and he had this-what do you call it- paul:	like a veil over your head? hintze: 	veil yes i couldn’t get the word. veil, white veil, everything nice. and especially if nice [unclear 00:31:45] that what we got in before from the husband [laughter]. paul: 	that was his gift to you? hintze: 	yes yeah and then morning there [laughter]. paul: 	where were you married? hintze:	 in hamburg. paul: 	but where in hamburg? hintze: 	[unclear 00:32:04]. paul: 	was it a church or a house? hintze: 	no my parents had had they own house. father was his own man who did everything and he know how to do and we was married there, first in the church. paul: 	you were married in the church? hintze: 	yeah in the church evangalish and then from there to the-we was walking it’s not too far from our house just right. and so all friends and the boys they had girlfriends and they asked if they could and my father said yes. so it was a family also together. paul: 	do you remember how you felt during the marriage ceremony? how did you feel inside during the marriage ceremony? hintze: 	happy. i was very happy. i was always happy because the reason i was [unclear 00:33:22]. paul: 	tell me then, tell me about how it was that you eventually came into this country to the united states in 1923? hintze:	 oh my eldest-oldest-no eldest- paul: 	oldest. hintze: 	my oldest sister she was also here. paul: 	when did she come? hintze: 	she was here 18years old and friends of her they want to go to america, so they were so happy that they could take my sister along and my sister was right away working.  so then when i came over the next day i had some for my sister she had shown for me covered places where i could go for cleaning not only cleaning were the fine work, so nice and table on when they have company that was very rich people there. paul: 	how did your husband feel about-how did he feel about going to america and all of that sort of thing? hintze: 	he was also here, he was let me see-i was going with him and then my other sister older sister she was here in america and then i told him that she would like we come over and so my husband said then he want that we get married first. paul: 	so that’s why you got married in germany? i see. hintze: 	in germany yeah, because he had no-his father was not living and my parents they wanted all together. paul: 	when you were in germany growing up what did you know about america before you got here? hintze: 	well only that what my sister told us. that her life was very happy and everything has to work. paul: 	how did your husband feel about going to america? did he want to go? hintze: 	well yes yeah. he was young he was young anyhow [laughter]. paul: 	well tell me about-tell me about what you had to do to get ready to leave germany? hintze: 	i was still living as parents were still living my father mother. so they was more concerned that i had everything that i need. the necessary things and everything was clean and nice. paul: 	were there things that they gave you? hintze: 	yes. paul: 	what did they give you? hintze: 	because i was working for my father i never was working for other people always in his store and my brother’s, two brothers they was working in his [unclear 00:36:39] they called it. why do they say here- paul: 	what did your parents give you before you left for america? hintze: 	well not-only money, money. paul:	do you remember how much they gave you? hintze: 	no that i couldn’t say. paul: 	do you and your husband- did you have to undergo medical exams in hamburg before you left? hintze: 	yes, yeah. paul: 	what do you remember about that? hintze: 	well as long as you go to the doctor he examined you and he put paper out. he got the paper maybe he send it to other places that i remember, that was all- paul: 	do you remember packing to get ready to leave? what did you pack to take with you to america? hintze: 	well especially my things for my personal for remembrance or- paul: 	what were those things? hintze: 	yeah what was that? maybe sometime only if a very nice picture or a pocket book or something that i liked that i would like to bring along to america. paul: 	do you remember what kind of suitcases you had? hintze: 	oh yeah, a big one with-what do you say in german to this i don’t know- paul:	like divisions inside them? hintze: 	yes. yes. paul:	like a big trunk [unclear 00:38:27]. hintze: 	like a trunk yes i could say trunk and then from hands. the trunk goes on the ship as i have nothing to do with the trunk only before i came home but then not in the ship i didn’t get it in the house where i was living with my sister. paul: 	what about your husband did he take anything special that sticks out in your mind before he left? hintze: 	no. paul: 	you’re travelling together with him, yes? hintze: 	yes yeah. paul: 	did you family give any kind of a party or a sendoff? hintze: 	oh yes. paul: 	what sticks out in your mind about that? hintze: 	well that was a real party for the aunts and the uncles and all the whole family came together. and all what was we was eating my mother made it. she was here a cook, her own cook in her house and the people came here to her house and was eating there.  paul: 	how did you feel about leaving germy? how did you feel inside about leaving your home? hintze: 	i was happy, yeah. i was happy because his parents was very-no the mother was not living no more, the father he likes me very much and i am very honest he likes me so much he would marry me if i would not marry his son [laughter]. that i remember. he likes me so much. i could do anything but i didn’t only what you would do. paul: 	where did you go to get on the ship? hintze: 	first by train. hamburg [unclear 00:40:32] that was the main [unclear 00:40:35]. my english or my german is [unclear 00:40:47]. paul: 	did you say bremerhaven is that where you went? hintze: 	bremerhaven, from bremerhaven with the ship. paul:	 i see so you were in hamburg already- hintze: 	then with the train and we even past france and we was-i think we was only two to three days in france. that was like not so expensive because it was all included.  paul: 	when you bought your ship ticket all of that was included? hintze:	 yes. paul: 	do you remember how much your ship ticket cost? hintze: 	that i don’t remember no more. paul: 	where did you actually get on the ship? hintze: 	in hamburg. there is a big water for all the big ships from all the other land coming in and from there they going out to america and the other cities. paul: 	did anything happen to you before you got on the ship? hintze: 	no. paul:	did they examine you again or? hintze: 	oh yeah, that they do. on the ship. paul:	on the ship? hintze: 	on the ship. paul: 	do you know what the name of the ship was? hintze: 	no, no. i couldn’t. paul: 	had you ever been on a ship before? hintze: 	no paul: 	what did you think when you saw this big thing that you had to get into? hintze: 	i saw that even my oldest sister went to america then i saw how it looks, so i was not surprised i know it already. paul: 	did you stay with your husband in the ship? hintze: 	yes. paul: 	and can you describe where you slept on the ship? hintze: 	yeah that was really a nice little room in this ship and elegant everything was nice. paul: 	what sticks out in your mind about the time that you spent on the ship? hintze: 	that was every day and every hour was happy. nice. paul: 	what did you do on the ship? hintze: 	oh we was playing the games-you go on ship and this looks so nice, you don’t do nothing else than standing on the railing and look down to the water all around you. paul:	 did you meet any of the staff in the ship people who worked on the ship? hintze: 	yes i meet them because my sister she was-before i went over she went as the oldest she went over and she sent me the money to come after. and he then was the first who was working there on the ship as not really working has to order everything to the other. so he introduced because he met my sister before he was very nice and he show me everything as i had a very good time. paul: 	what about your husband how-did he enjoy his time on the ship? hintze: 	yes, yeah. paul: 	did either of you get sea sick? hintze:	 no. paul:	do you remember what time of the year this is that you are traveling? hintze: 	let me see-that was in the winter time. i think so in the winter. in november, in december i get married 22nd, of december. paul: 	and this is like a year later then when you got married? hintze: 	yeah so yeah paul: 	tell me about where you ate on the ship? hintze: 	oh like here when the big ship going away its all the same only there in german and here in english. all the same the same way like- paul:	did they have a special place where your food was served on the ship? hintze:	oh yes sure, there i would say the english people come not with this how it is in germany with the ships on everything. yeah. paul:	 did you see anything on the ship that was new to you, that you had never seen before? hintze:	 no, because it was not-between the time we go sometime and we want to go in on a saturday or a sunday so little, they let us go to the ship we could go. there was some ship you could go on the ship. paul:	 i see. this is back in hamburg you could do that? hintze:	 in hamburg yes. paul:	do you know how long this ship took to get to new york? hintze: 	eight days. paul:	do you remember seeing the statue of liberty? hintze:	 yes. paul:	 did you know what that was? hintze: 	yes, because i know from school, yeah we had that in the school, statue of liberty yeah. paul: 	did anything special happen when the ship went by the statue of liberty? hintze:	 no everything was so nice and smooth and good. paul: 	tell me what happened when the ship got to new york what happened next? hintze: 	then i saw some of my sisters standing and waving [laughter]. she was excited, so it was really like here only germany and english but the same really like here. paul: 	when the ship came to new york you said you had to go to ellis island, what do you remember about going to ellis island? hintze: 	well that we had to go to the other ship the smaller ship into ellis island to ellis island and they booked us the paper and so we was there couple days. paul: 	oh you had to stay a couple days in ellis island.  why did you have to stay there? hintze:	well that was so included in the price.  paul: 	do you remember where you slept on ellis island? hintze: 	we had our room. paul: 	you had room when you were in ellis island. hintze: 	yes oh yes and everything perfect. paul: 	do you remember what happened to you while you were there? what did they do? hintze: 	well that is up to you what you do because you can do anything there. i was always standing and looking in the water i liked to see it all the way from the- paul: 	but in ellis island? that’s on the ship then-in ellis island what happened at ellis island? what did you have to do at ellis island? do you remember? hintze:	 [unclear 00:48:41] two days i think we went on- paul: 	did they examine you at ellis island? hintze: 	always. paul: 	you were always examined? hintze: 	examine yes. and american ship and the other ship-always examined. that’s the main thing, you have to be healthy. paul: 	did anyone talk to you at ellis island. hintze: 	well yes, not much but so little bit. paul: 	where did you meet your sister? where did she come to meet you? hintze: 	in america. paul: 	yes i know but where-where in new york did she-where did you meet your sister when she got here? hintze:	 in new york. paul:	did she come to ellis island or did she-did you go to new york to meet her? hintze: 	no she came to new york because that was too much for her. ellis island takes too much time. and she made a short when the ship goes here to new york so i went on there and then i saw my sister [laughter]. paul:	how did it feel to see your sister again? hintze: 	[laughter] happy. paul: 	did your sister know your husband? hintze: 	no, only writing what was writing here. paul: 	oh writing letters? i see. hintze: 	writing letters. paul: 	where did your sister take you after she met you? hintze: 	to her house.  paul: 	which was where? hintze: 	in hoboken. paul: 	and can you describe what-where she lived what it looked like? hintze: 	oh yeah. a very nice house very big because she had everyday cover man coming for eating that was her pocket book money. but she made extra. that i remember. paul: 	so your sister is doing the same thing your mother is doing in germany? hintze: 	that’s right. paul: 	bringing in boarders. hintze: 	yes. paul: 	can you describe the actual-it’s a house that she has? you said she is living in a house or apartment? hintze: 	yes. let me see. yes yeah she had-but very small everything over there even two bedroom, a bathrooms i remember. paul: 	was your sister married at this time? hintze: 	yes. paul: 	oh so she was? hintze: 	she was so married when she get over this husband. paul: 	so she married somebody here. hintze:	 very young and very pretty she is [laughter]. she is very pretty. paul: 	how long did you stay with your sister? hintze:	well till i got-no when i was came on the next day i has to go to rich people to help them. not cleaning but helping the table, the everything is in order with the clothes.  paul: 	who taught you how to do those things? hintze: 	because my sister know that i am very-know it when i was in germany i did it [unclear 00:52:16] for other people for rich people.  paul: 	how did your husband feel about you getting a job so quickly? hintze: 	well he did everything-he know i did everything that was right so he did trust me and it was all alright. paul:	 did he get a job?  hintze: 	yes. paul: 	what job did he get? hintze: 	he was the first man in the delicatessen store. paul: 	which is what he was doing in germany right? hintze:	 in germany yes. paul: 	but this is in hoboken? hintze: 	no he was in new york. paul:	 in new york. but you were living in hoboken? hintze: 	yeah, he had always way with the train would have in the beginning to save the money for the bicycle from hoboken to new york with bicycle. if you know what a bicycle is? paul: 	yes, he would have had to take the bicycle on the train to go into new york. hintze: 	yeah. paul: 	tell me some more about your work at the home of the rich people. did you- hintze: 	well not cleaning. she had a woman there for cleaning. but i have to take care of her dress and what she was wearing and helping her when she got dressed. paul: 	did she have clothes that were difficult to get into? hintze:	 no, but everything elegant and rich because it was rich people there. my sister was giving me this job because when she told the people her sister will come and she likes to work oh [laughter]. paul: 	where did the rich people live? hintze: 	in hoboken and in weehawken. in weehawken they had a house in weehawken. paul: 	how long did you work for the rich people? hintze: 	not quite a year because then i get married. paul: 	well you were married already when you got to america? hintze: 	no. over here.  paul: 	you got married in america? i thought you were married in germany? hintze:	 no. no. paul: 	so where did you meet your husband? hintze: 	in germany. he was the first man in the delicatessen store. my parents-then i don’t want to get married so i got married here.  paul: 	oh okay. alright. how did you learn english? hintze: 	i had to learn it. paul: 	but how? did someone teach you or? hintze: 	no. paul: 	do you remember the first words that you learned? hintze: 	every word that i needed i learned. male:	 excuse me can i lock here? paul: 	just in a minute. hintze: 	because here i could only speak german but i was learning also very first anyhow. nobody has to tell me soon from talking i know how to speak english. paul: 	we have just a couple of minutes left and you said that you like to sing and i was hoping you sang us one german song and you sing another german song for us on tape. hintze: 	not yet. paul: 	no, okay. i thought maybe you would like to. hintze: 	no not yet. paul:	did you ever go back to germany to visit? hintze: 	i didn’t get it right. paul: 	did you go back to germany ever? hintze: 	oh yes four times. but then i stopped because it was too expensive. they want you to bring to germany or from germany to america [laughter]. it was expensive. paul: 	do you think of yourself as being german or as being american? hintze: 	no, american because i was in america. paul: 	well mrs. hintze i want to thank you very much for letting me ask you this questions. hintze: 	you are welcome. paul: 	it’s very kind to let me come in [unclear 00:57:07]. hintze: 	that’s alright. paul: 	this is paul seacrest signing off with gretchen hintze on the thursday september 28th 1995 at the hamilton park care facility in jersey city. thank you. hintze: 	yes you are welcome.