 janet: 	today is november the 8th- kayekjian: 	the 9th isn’t it? janet:	 is it the 9th? kayekjian: 	i think it’s the 9th i am quite sure. janet: 	okay well its wednesday anyway and it’s november. i am here in the armenian nursing home. and we are in roslyn i guess. isn’t this in roslyn? the name of the town? kayekjian: 	rosendale. janet:	kayekjianndale. and i am here with mrs. kayekjian kayekjian. who came from turkey? she is armenian and she came from turkey when she was about nine years of age in 1915.  and i am looking forward to whatever you can remember. i’ll ask you big question and whatever you remember you can tell me. mrs. kayekjian tell for the tape again your birth date and where you born? kayekjian: 	i was born august 18 1906.  janet: 	and where were you born? kayekjian:	 in turkey. janet:	 and the name of the town? kayekjian:	 sivas janet: 	okay and did you live in sivas up until the time you left for america? kayekjian: 	yes. janet: 	okay so you were in sivas for about nine years? now when you think of sivas now, what comes to your mind? kayekjian: 	nothing really nothing much except the school. janet: 	what do you remember? kayekjian: 	well the school was very nice but- janet: 	what did it look like? kayekjian:	 i t was a beautiful school. it was near a river like. the scenery was building and when we got on the recess we used to feed the ducks-the ducks on the tank. like a swan boat here.  janet:	 do you remember the name of that river? kayekjian: 	no i don’t. janet:	 for you did you like going to school? kayekjian: 	i did but i didn’t go very much. i dint learn armenian till this day because my sister margaret and i had to get up and work because they were six children.  only my father was working. and my sister and i would be next on this. i think my sister was 14. and i think i was a little older than that. might be 15 or something i forget now. janet: 	well now was this in turkey? because you were only nine years old when you left. kayekjian: 	no, this is not in turkey this is here. this is in bridge water. janet: 	okay lets first talk about life in turkey. did you go to school at all? kayekjian: 	no, no, no we didn’t. janet: 	do you remember-why don’t you start with your father name? what was his name? kayekjian: 	khchrdoor janet: 	how do you spell that? kayekjian: 	khchrdoor. khchrdoor. janet:	 khchrdoor kayekjian:	 vartavebian that’s his last name. janet: 	vartavebian and that was your maiden name? kayekjian: 	that’s right. janet: 	and that’s vartavebian. kayekjian: 	yeah.  janet: 	okay your mother what was her name? kayekjian: 	her name is maritsa. janet:	 maritsa? kayekjian: 	yeah like mary.  janet: 	and do you spell maritsa marit- kayekjian:	 ce maritsa ca i think. maritsa. janet: 	i see and do you remember your mother's maiden name before she married? kayekjian: 	yes. wait a minute. zaitujan. janet:	 oh good. can you spell that one? kayekjian: 	zatunjian janet: 	okay good- kayekjian: 	[laughter] i feel like i [unclear 00:04:19] janet: 	you remember a lot. that’s wonderful. you can spell them besides. now do you remember your grandparents from either side? kayekjian: 	my father side no. my mother's side i remember just my grandfather. janet: 	what do you remember about him? kayekjian: 	well he was nice he used to give us candy gum when we were kids. and then when we went to bed he used to tell a story.  janet: 	oh. can you remember anything about the stories that your grandfather told you? kayekjian: 	no i don’t. janet: 	yeah. he liked to-he tells you a story or he read you a story? kayekjian: 	no he makes them up. janet: 	oh he made them up. kayekjian: 	and we fall asleep in about 5-10minutes and that’s it and he used to covers us and goes to his room. janet: 	and do you remember like what would they be about? what would he make them up about? kayekjian: 	pardon? janet: 	what would he make stories up about? kayekjian: 	about simple things. it wasn’t anything frightful or anything. very simple. i think he made them up. i still feel this day that he made [unclear 00:05:35] janet: 	now was that grandfather the one who was a minister or a bishop? kayekjian: 	no. janet: 	no that was another one. kayekjian: 	the one was a minister was on my father side. this is on my mother side. i don’t know what he did for work i don’t know. janet:	 and did you have a lot of aunts and uncles around? kayekjian: 	yes i did have. but don’t ask me to name names. janet: 	no you don’t need to name them. but can you remember like when would you see them? what would be the occasion when you would see them? kayekjian: 	oh when like christmas, easter things holidays like that. because everybody was so hard. janet:	 can you remember how any of the holidays were celebrated? kayekjian: 	like here christmas. well we didn’t have the thanksgiving but we had christmas and easter. those things we do have. but we didn’t have the things here. the holidays they have it here like- janet: 	halloween, thanksgiving. but when you celebrated easter let’s say was it any different from the way we do it here? kayekjian: 	no. we used to-my mother used to color eggs. and we used to crack eggs with each other. janet: 	well you crack eggs with someone else's? kayekjian:	 like you have one and hold it like that and i cracked it. if yours broke i will take it if mine broke you take it. just simple fun that’s all.  janet: 	yes. what else did you do for fun when you were little? kayekjian: 	we played jump rope. janet: 	oh really did you have like little rhymes that you said when you jumped rope? kayekjian: 	yes janet: 	can you remember any? kayekjian: 	i think like one two buckle my shoe something like that. three four shut the door, five six pickup sticks, seven eight lay them straight, nine ten the good fat hen [laughter]. janet: 	that’s the same as in this country. same kind of rhyme. kayekjian: 	yeah i know. janet: 	and can you remember anything else that you did for fun? kayekjian:	 for fun. we played-what is it we played? i told you we played jump rope? janet: 	yes. kayekjian: 	yeah and we have swings. the swings were nice. it was like an apricot tree. the swings that we would make. and we used to swing and the apricot just would fall right down our heads and we used to take them and eat them. they would be half ripe but we like it. janet: 	oh wow! and what was growing around there? what kinds of things did you have to eat?  kayekjian: 	mostly apricots and the mulberries. mulberry bush. it was white and there was blue kind too. that was very sweet. janet: 	and what would you eat? what would be made from the mulberries? kayekjian: 	god i don’t know. my mother used to make something i forget now. i think she used to take the syrup from the mulberry bush and cook the syrup and keep it in a jar to use in winter time. yeah. janet: 	do you remember anything else about what you had for food in turkey that you remember? kayekjian:	 i had the same as here. almost the same yeah. janet:	 now-were you religious? was your family religious? kayekjian: 	oh yes definitely yeah. we could never go-see that supper we had to take turns six of us. today is my turn, tomorrow is yours and the next day it is margaret’s’. they all take turns every day to say the prayer before we eat. and at night we pray before we went to bed.  janet: 	can you remember any of those prayers that you said like grace before you ate? kayekjian: 	yeah like our father in armenian mostly. and-