 danny: 	this is danny gumb and i’m speaking with mrs. kate barham on the 16th day of september 1985 and it’s 3.10, we are beginning this interview at 3.10 and we are about to interview mrs. barham about her work experience on ellis island and her immigration experience on ellis island in the year 1929.  tape 1 side 1  danny:	okay mrs. barham if we could start with the just basic question of when and where were you born? barham:	july 16, 1903. danny:	and where? barham:	portsmouth, england danny:	and can you give us a little background as to how you began work for dr. fuller. barham:	well as i said we moved from portsmouth we went to a little place outside of southampton called swaythling that’s where i went to school and there and i went to work for dr. fuller when i was 21 till i was 25 four years. then he had the orders to come to the united states.  danny:	who was dr. fuller?  barham:	he was an american doctor that was sent by the american government, the united states public health service and he was stationed at the consulate’s office in southampton.  danny:	and what was his job there? barham:	he was a doctor that examined people that came there for their visas and their papers to come to the unites states. he was one of seven doctors that were sent in different parts of europe so that the immigrants that came to him they didn’t have any illnesses or anything to stop them from entering to the united states or if they did, then he would turn them down there.  so that saved them selling all their—everything they owned to go to the united states and then when they got to ellis island they didn’t have to stay so long and they would eventually get into the united states.  danny:	 what year did you start working for him?  barham:	1925. would it have been? danny:	let’s see you were born in 1902.  barham:	3. danny:	1903 and you were 21 barham:	right 21  danny:	so 24 right, okay. barham:	yes 25 that’s right. danny:	what did you do for him? what was your job?  barham:	well, she didn’t have any children till she got to england and she had the first child. i used to do general housecleaning, just clean up the house and help cooking we worked together. she was more like a sister than she was a boss. so i used to just work daily there for quite a while till after she had the baby but then they got a bigger a house then they rented the house and that was still in southampton area so i went with her then.  then she had the second child and then we stayed there until the last year then the lady who owned the house she wanted to come back and live in it herself. so we had to move again to another area in southampton. which was same thing it was a flat and that closer to the docks and all that sort of thing. so i had to take care of the children most of the time.  danny:	do you remember having a recollection of dr. fuller talking about his work?  barham:	not in a great deal he was a very quiet man, very tall six foot four but when they first—when i worked with them daily, i hardly ever saw him. i used to make his breakfast and put it on the table, when i heard him go to the bathroom i knew he was almost ready i put it on the table then he’d go and i didn’t even see him because i was not there when he came home at night time. she stayed and then but i used to live about 2 or 3 o’clock in the afternoon.  danny:	you never had an occasion to go to his office?  barham:	no, all the office staff one time they had thanksgiving party she did dinner for them because in england we don’t recognize thanksgiving day like you do here. so all the office staff, all came and had dinner with i and her and him we all cooked between us and my mother came down and helped us [laughs]. danny:	you were leaving at home at this time?  barham:	when we had thanksgiving dinner she’d gone into the house in high field lane and i and that room between then i slept in then and i still slept in all the time in the other till we left to come here.  danny:	and when was dr. fuller transferred?  barham:	well he was supposed to be there for three years but dr. bared the head of the consulate, they said they’d got in touch with the american government and asked him if he would let him stay another year.  an extra year, dr. fuller did, so the whole american consulates office all clear out. all americans so their time was up too. so he stayed there four years instead of the three.  danny: 	why did they all clear out? barham:	well four years was that they all had so many years to do at the consular’s office, so that’s why they figured they must as well have whole new staff in there at one time so then with dr. fuller and we all- they took a trip to scotland before they left and my sister, i stayed with her with the two children for those two weeks.  	then we got on a boat in southampton and went to france for 10 days dr. fuller wanted 10 days to go to a place called carahest c-a-r-a-h-e-t little village it was. nobody could speak english we didn’t know where to get even a boiled egg for the children [laughter] nobody spoke so we just ate what was on the menu.  the town crier used to come in the middle of the day to give the news but other than that then after the 10 days we left [inaudible 00:04:55] and president harding and then we came. so we didn’t know where we were going until we got to staten island then when the inspectors came aboard for the passengers and also her clearance and they gave dr. fuller his orders that he was going back to ellis island in the hospital department.  danny:	did you have to buy tickets or do any--?  barham:	no, they did everything. i didn’t have nothing to do with it just had my passport that was all.  danny:	what was the arrangement that the understanding was that you were going to come to the united--  barham:	with them, yes. danny: 	too continue to work for them.  barham: 	 for them, yes. danny: 	were you planning on staying here?  barham:	well i just took things as they come along i was hesitant about coming at first, then my mother said, “well, if you don’t like it you can always come back.” you see because another time there was another irish girls worked there and they had to send most of their money back home to help the rest of their family.  but i wasn’t in a situation like that i could just go back you know. and i didn’t have to send any money or anything but i agreed to come in.  	she used to give me a pound a week in england which at that time was $5 but i did not realize in the exchange there was a difference i mean $5 dollars didn’t go nowhere here to what a pound did in england.  	so, then as i said i took care of the children while they were on the island because i had to share the staff house with dr scully so we got our food from the main kitchen and the maids rather waitresses they charged to come down and serve meals to dr. scully and to us. so all i had to do was just watch the two children.  danny:	as far as the voyage, do you know what class you were travelling in?  barham:	well it was a half cargo and half passenger, so it was only one class. danny:	was it first class or second class--  barham:	well just the second class not that many passengers because he carry cargo too you see so--. he had to come on back by america government you know i mean i don’t think he had a choice. [chuckles].  danny:	you said the inspectors came on board?  barham:	staten island and they do that all the time for liners when i took two years after i was here, i went back, so i had to get through that they come look through the passengers’ passports to see if you’re coming in properly. what they do now i don’t know. i said that’s’ where he got his boat anchored at staten island.  danny:	so do you remember your first impression of ellis island?  barham:	well, no it didn’t i just sort of went along with them you know and just took things as they come, i just figured where else could i go? another first thing dr. fuller the first thing coming up to hudson lipton had a great big sign lipton’s tea and i couldn’t get any tea in france so he says, “you will you be able to have all the tea you want now you know [laughs].” [inaudible 00:11:28] and they had a great big jersey city i huge great big clock. it was very impressive. of course there weren’t all the tall buildings in new york at that time the newest building on broadway was the tallest building when i came. danny:	let’s get just the year again, what year did you start working there?  barham:	1930. danny:	1930.  barham:	yes.  danny: 	you started working.  barham:	well as i said yes it must have been because i came in 29 year 30 because i married my husband when i was 27 and he came to ellis island as a cook he always worked as and after the fullers went to california and then as i stayed back to lederberg. fullers had to go.  danny:	so how long did you work for the fullers in ellis island?  barham:	about-- they left in december, six months on ellis island itself because as i said i worked for them for four years in england. danny:	and where were you living during this time?  barham:	well, after they left you see as i said they left here then i lived in up here. danny: 	okay so they lived in corner of the staff house.  barham:	yes.  danny: 	the corner facing the statue of liberty. barham:	yes because i could look at it from my bedroom window and i see the statue of liberty right in my bedroom window.  danny:	but you were also—you were living--the first period you were living the in the staff house here and then you moved.  barham:	then when i applied for a job of course i knew all the office staff mr. doranti [sp] and mr. theeson [sp] or several others who used to see me with the children and all that you know, so when they knew the fullers were going and that i had planned to stay there they wanted to know if i wanted a job on the island.  so first i worked in the doctors’ dining room. we used to have doctors who slept there but then there were doctors who came in all from new york came out and they had to eat lunch there and some of them stayed and had dinner as well. some came to breakfast, almost all of them. danny:	were these doctors working on ellis island? barham:	oh yes, they were around at different i don’t know i guess they went over to with the immigration side. i don’t know they were all one was dr. norway he lived on this part of the island in a house along here and he was an ear, nose and throat doctor and of course if any of the employees got sick they had a two to three rooms like a little area room where we were—like i had tonsillitis and then they put me in this little room.  one of the doctors used to come and check on me and see. they had different ones of course they had nurses too taking care of different staff.  danny:	so after living with the fullers in the corner house and the staff house you moved-- barham:	to the center building of the main building i guess you would call we used to call these 1st island and 2nd island and 3rd island you know we used to say, “oh we’re going to 2nd island,” and they say, “oh we’re going to 1st island, anybody.” they said it was to -- danny:	the 2nd island the main building in the 2nd island, the building right across the [inaudible 00:15:19] from the great registry hall. barham:	that’s right yes, the one across but on top floor. there were several of them waitresses had all the different part of the building. cleaning girls did all the cleaning around in the wards in the hospital. danny:	so what sorts of patients were in the hospital at this time? barham:	well most of them were as i said the sailors of the coast guards and of course if any of the passengers on any liners had got taken sick they used to bring them to ellis island too.   barham	what other kinds of sailors [inaudible 00:16:03]?  barham:	the coast guard and seamen, if any of them were sick at sea.  danny:	was the hospital crowded in those days?  barham:	not that not too crowded no. but of course if any of the employees got sick too they were put in different wards they had for different sickness. but they had two kitchens. they had where they set their food around. they had a kitchen over here and then they had a kitchen over here.  danny:	kitchen on the 2nd island?    barham:	yes they had a kitchen in the basement of that building then  danny:	they had a main building on the 2nd island? barham: 	yes then they had a kitchen here. where this is a kitchen right in there.  danny:	the center part of the 3rd island.  barham: 	because at lunch time all the employees that came over from new york, worked in the office and did all different work on the island and cleaning and different things they come over there quite a lot of people they all had their lunch on the island.  danny: 	the employees on the 1st island? barham:	no, not them just some these two islands they were away from us all altogether. like dr. fuller used to go over to see different immigrants and things like that. i always remember he came back one lunch time and that he had the job of a man and there was several doctors had turned him down this man for some reason. dr fuller had to have the final say whether he was to be deported or not be deported and he said you know just mentioned at lunchtime “oh i hate this job to have to be the one to give the final decision”.  danny:	did he say how he decided that case?  barham:	no, he didn’t say finally but he didn’t mention when came home but of course in front of me he probably wouldn’t tell me, he said a lot to his wife but as i said he was a very quiet man hated to hurt anybody’s feelings.  	i remember too he did say- i think that was in southampton here a boy from the welsh mines from came to the office and he wanted to go to chicago and he said that it would be too much for him because he had been down in the mines so long and all of that he would probably it would have affect him mentally, so he discouraged the boy and told him there wasn’t anything for his work he discouraged him from going because he was afraid because i think he studied the brain because i had a twin sister and i’m the oldest of the two by 15 minutes. and his wife said to him when of course elsie’s first come around and she said, “oh baby this is kitty’s twin sister,” so she said, “which do you think is the oldest?” he said, “kitty is” just by looking at us. he knew you know that sort of thing.  danny:	why did he discourage the welsh?  barham:	because he thought it would affect him mentally would go crazy.  danny: 	oh he wouldn’t be able to adjust? barham:	adjust to all the noise and everything.  danny:  	going in the new world. barham:	 that’s right but of course that was [inaudible 00:19:47] never told her all details and take things every day. danny:	so after you worked with the fullers your first job was as a waitress and then [inaudible 00:20:01]. barham:	yes we got paid by the american government.   danny:	so you were a civil servant?  barham:	well i guess we all got paid by checks through the american united states american government i don’t know how have forgotten now. then i got too much more money that we got $35 a week-- every two weeks and when on board they made a lot of difference. danny:	i’m wondering if you had to be an american citizen to have that job. barham:	no, i didn’t become a citizen until 1942. danny: 	were there other foreign people holding these [inaudible 00:20:47].   barham:	mostly irish people that worked down there. there was a whole bunch of them, waitresses there’s a girl, well several of them i’ve worked with them all irish, even the nurses they had a lot of irish nurses and the catholic priests used to come over to give us sunday morning services. their chapel a little place they had near the ferry boat. danny:	do you know where the chapel was?  barham:	it was-no it would be over in here. it’s because yes 2nd island.  danny: 	the western end of the 2nd island.  barham:	i remember one day coming across here and i walked along this path and as i got to this building a woman’s face was up against the wire screening and you know to this day i can still see that woman’s face at that screen door.  you know she was a mental case but she just was happened to be  standing and i walked by not expecting to see anybody and she had it right up close to the wire mesh and it caught me like that and i’ll never forget.  danny:	[inaudible 00:13:12] on the... barham: 	2nd island. danny:	 2nd island on the western end, the new jersey end. barham:	that’s right. friday nights they used to have movies down there, any social functions they had down there.  danny:	on that same--   barham:	same little--wasn’t a big room but sometimes they have little parties there and all that the nurses used to get together. some of the girls get engaged or something and we used to be able to go down there and give a party for them or something like that. danny: 	were there any immigrants in the hospital [inaudible 00:22:55]?  barham:	no, no no they were all people as i said they had lived on, slept up their the girls was the waitresses i don’t know just what, they came into the states i mean after that i don’t know they must have migrated from ireland. i think we know that now. but at that time they wouldn’t face me.  danny:	[inaudible 00:23:22]. barham:	if any of them was sick [inaudible 00:23:26] patients now well sick of hospital side  danny:	did you have any contact with any of the patients? barham:	no no, no. i just took care as i said in the dining rooms area, kitchen, and dining room area. danny: 	so did you have another job on ellis or was that--?  barham:	as i say as each girl had their different days off you know. sometimes i worked in the nurse’s dining room and sometimes i’d worked where the in 2nd island, no 3rd island. they had the office people from 2nd island come over. they have one room where we used to give them lunch. three girls one pantry took two girls took care of the nurses and one girl took care of the others. that’s a different areas as each girl had their days off most of the time i was in the doctor’s dining room. danny: 	and how long was that job, how long did you stay in that job? barham:	well then i stayed there just two years and i went i got married between times and i got pregnant and so i went home just two years after i landed i went back again and that’s how my daughter was born in england.  danny:	how did you meet your husband? barham:	well him being in the kitchen going back and forth around you know he was a californian. danny: 	and what was his position there?  barham:	a cook. second cook then he got to cook when the chef day off, he was a chef when chef was off. otherwise he was a second cook and he helped in 3rd island in that way. he worked up in briarcliff manor up here and joined the summer seas and the country club was a chef up there.  and he came down to new york looking for work and landed over in ellis island [chuckle]. so i met him. [inaudible 00:25:50] i was four and half months pregnant when i left but i left six papers with mr. drandy [sp] one 2nd island in the office there he fixed both an affidavit for me and passports. i had four passports altogether [chuckle].   danny:	four passports?  barham:	yes, i let them what do you call it now? i renewed them when i made another [inaudible 00:26:31]10 years in between time so i had get a new passport each time so i’d say i have the paper if you want to see it. danny:	yes well not right now but in a minute. barham:	[inaudible 00:26:53] country when i went to england when my daughter was born.  danny:	weren’t you an american citizen then having married in america?  barham:	no, i had to wait five years before but then i still had to go to the where they go to have people where i got the citizenship papers all that filled out. that’s in 1942 when my husband then he was working in the defense plant there in new jersey so but my sister in england she didn’t want me to become a citizen because she saw some canadian woman at that time was trying to say people that spoke english shouldn’t have to go through the trouble of declaring different things then when war broke out and everything, i decided it’s best for the children’s sake cause if he ever had to go to war, anything happened to him, i wouldn’t  get any benefits at all for the children in that way.  after ellis island broke up the hospital section and went to steton island he didn’t go with them there.  he took a trip on the leviathan and that last trip the leviathan he got on and went to cook on that. then he worked in new york hospital. danny:	when was ellis island hospital broken up? barham:	it was about 31 32 because he stayed there for a while cause i lived then in new jersey and then it broke up and  everything deteriorated and just let go taken it over soon afterwards you know they could have made money all these years.  danny:	did you have much of an opportunity to go to the 1st island? barham:	no, i never had any opportunity to go over there at all?  danny: 	you never saw the grand hall? barham:	no i never did. as i said, nothing nobody ever said you should go or anything we just never thought about it the immigration and all that sort of thing, my brothers used to talk about i had a brother that was in the [inaudible 00:29:43] when they took a lot of the immigrants back you know the shipping company that brought them here they had to ship them back.  well i think it was the shipping companies had to pay their way back and it meant a lot of expense to them. i had it here, i just got these there just here. it was turned over after the first world war.  danny:	was it a passenger vessel [inaudible 00:30:25]………………..?  barham:	yes i went up when my daughter was born i went back to england on her.  end of side 1 one. tape 1 danny:	okay tape 1 side 2.  danny:	mrs. barham i understand you were married on ellis island? barham:	i met my husband on ellis island and we were married on the 4th of august and we went to a church around a corner on 29th street and i went back. i still worked on ellis island.  danny:	did you have the reception on ellis island? barham:	no i went with some friends of mine i knew from england up to her apartment up in 65th street of 30 avenue near new york hospital the research foundation up there. danny:	while you were working on ellis, did most of the employees go to new york city very often? barham:	oh yes we could go over every night and when we finished our work say about 6 o’ clock to  5 o’clock we have dinner but i mean there was [unclear 00:34:47] ferry boat went over across there but the last the 11.15 boat came back the next one was 12.15. so if you missed that you stayed there [laughs] all night. danny:	and how much was the fare? barham:	it doesn’t cost anything. no we'd go back and forth. in fact justin and john, i used to take them the over in the evening when i was taking care of them. take them across on the ferry boat take them to the museum that was there was a big museum down [inaudible 00:32:23]  and take them home to corny island all that had a huge big museum aquarium rather and that i used to take them over there one evening he went to take them somewhere before they went to bed.  we’d have supper around 5 o’clock 5.30 and then in the evening take them in the summer time of course and there was something to do. their father used to let them do all kinds of things, he used to the ferry boat goes up and down when it goes into the slip. well he used to let them walk all over the top of that because he could hold them and he used to expect me to do it. danny:	go over the rail? barham:	well its two big loop side then the platform go up and down. danny:	oh the rumps, the gangways. barham:	the rumps that’s right, he used to take them over the first time and let them watch the men fire the furnaces, the coal and everything, he used to take them down in the engine room with the very boat things like that which i couldn’t do. [laughs] danny:	how long did the ferry trip take? barham:	10 or 15 minutes and so according to the tide. we moved then into jersey, then we did live out in brooklyn with my husband. we got a small apartment there but then a couple that we got to know they had a house down in south jersey down- near my memory is getting bad.  danny: 	interesting how the food got there. barham:	and these trucks you know [unclear 00:34:36] used to do that one time.  danny:	how did the food get to the immigrants on the 1st island?  barham:	well they had their own kitchen. they had everything to themselves.  i don’t know what they had over there at all.  danny:	do you know if the food was different?  barham:	no, i have no idea.  danny:	what about the trucks that you spoke of.  barham:	kitchen for the different dining rooms they had these trucks with different warehouse in them they put the food in them and then like we used to put them in the steam tables take them up and put them in steam tables. danny:	these were for the patients? barham:	no, this is for the doctors and nurses and employees and all that. danny:	they were like little carts.  barham:	yes and then they used to have one on the front bend of the staff house but then we used to reheat it on the stove down there. danny:	what was the food like at the hospital?  barham:	it looked very good. i mean you couldn’t complain too much about it and that only good thing is cook on 3rd island at night time and he was a greek and the night employees used complain about his food and when i was in england my husband he took over the night cook’s job. danny:  	he did what? what did you say? barham:	he cooked for the night people. the people that worked at night time in the 3rd island kitchen. they all went there to eat so the cook in there. danny:	where were the merchant marines? what kind of problems did the merchant marines who were in the [crosstalk 00:36:38]? barham:	as far as i know it they had different syphilis cases and gonorrhea and all that we used to have a doctor used to take care of them used to come and eat doctors dining room and talk to them different things all well the rest of it was he had a practice at new york city had different people that came for him in the middle of the night and all that sort of thing but he was the one that came. danny:	you know who paid for this care?  barham:	well government i imagine. all the doctors that were there were under the public health service united states public health service and they were all recording i don’t know how many years they did in it but do their years were supposed to do three years foreign service.  so that’s how dr. fuller when he went to england that was considered three years foreign service, the in four years that he did. so that if he came back from the states he would never have to go oversees again. you’d stay in the states. she didn’t buy a lot of stuff in england but when she came to new york while she was on ellis island she bought all new silver ware and glassware, china and all kinds of things. that was one reason why i didn’t want to go with them i didn’t want the responsibility of taking care of them. [chuckles].  and then my brothers as they came back and forth on the boats that i saw him about every three weeks so he kept me in touch with rest of the family and then took me went different friends of his— danny:	your brother was coming from england? barham:	yes back and forth from england, he was the [inaudible 00:38:26] he was with the [inaudible 00:38:28] company he was for 43 years. so he was on the queen mary even when she was being built, he was on queen elizabeth when she was being built and he sailed with them on their maiden voyage he was on the [inaudible 00:38:44] and he was on the [inaudible 00:38:46] and the mauritania and then a lot of different ones. danny:	we have this photo of ellis island and it would be interesting mrs. barham if you could walk us through the 3rd island to start with and the staff house, the corner facing the statue of liberty. what were these other were buildings moving from east to west. what were the other buildings used for when you were there? barham:	well this was a [inaudible 00:39:20]. these were the hospital wards. here was the employees sleeping quarters, this was the employees sleeping quarters.  danny:	the employees’ sleeping quarters were on the eastern end of the third island?  burham:	if you come down here these were wards, hospital wards here, that’s one two three four there and then there was a main kitchen. danny:	right in the center of the 3rd island. barham:	yes and there’s another ward here, another ward here, another ward there but i don’t know what they were all used for. i don’t know what this was here. danny:	on the western end the 3rd island you don’t know what-- barham:	no i guess i don’t know whether it was sleeping quarters for employees or not quite a lot of those in the island. then we went through this tunnel here covered in that area--  danny:	the tunnel between [inaudible 00:14:24] the southern island. barham	 yes, because when we got all filled up see you could have got out of here and you would walk across there.  danny: 	this was the space between the 3rd island and the 2nd island? barham:	yes. danny:	when you were there it was all filled in  barham: 	yes.  danny:	what was in that space? barham:	there was water before hand  danny:	 but in your days.   barham:	just dirt it had no gardens, no nothing may have had a few trees but nothing important  danny:	was it a lawn area? was there grass on it?  barham:	well yes, lots of rough stuff like over here they had tennis courts.   danny:	on the 2nd island the eastern end of the 2nd island.  barham:	had these porch that fellows used to play over there. that was a laundry room down there. danny:	still the eastern end of the 2nd island. barham:	that was the laundry room and that was the main office buildings where the office work was done and that you know like anybody looking for a job or anything went main office. danny:	this is right next to the [inaudible 00:41:41]. barham:	yes and this one too was a lot of offices. i’m just wondering where mr. theeson [sp] mr. durant [sp]. used to go up to new york, mr. theeson used to be on the island.  danny:	who is mr. theeson? [sp] barham:	he was sort of the head of personnel and they had lots of different offices where people come in new york, typing on general i don’t know what they kept and they had a pharmacy too with them right near to doctor’s dining room yes. and this doctors’ dining room in was in  barham:	this is the building next to the main building facing the ferry. danny:	who is mr. durant? barham:	he was another one in the office like when i had my papers filed out he filled it all out for me. send it away to people for passports.   danny:	do you know that he position was? barham:	it must have it on the piece of paper, i don’t know.  danny: 	then what was this building next to these office buildings.  barham:	just said this was the doctors dining room in here  and that was where there was  sort of -well of course you called out a person i guess because it was all locked up and everything where the insane people used to stay because i know one time the nurses come out from there and everything. so one of the patients she used to get very early in the morning and take off the sheets off the other patients she was mentally disturbed. danny:	take all the what off? barham:	all the coverage off the other patients  danny:	do you know where those patients came from? barham:	no i had no idea, it may have been immigrants i don’t know but if i say sometimes it was sailors and i told you this one man that i followed off the—he was on a ferry boat in a wheel chair and he’s supposed to have come off the leviathan and they brought him in and i followed him along the car door and everything.  they took him up into [unclear 00:44:10] send office where mr. durant [sp] or whoever it was i think some doctors had a doctor’s offices there i took him in there to get his record there was nothing about him, he suddenly went berserk and they put him down into the prison ward. so that was the doctor’s dining room to the left there was locked doors for these insane people and how many were in there i don’t know. danny:	do you know what was going on in the 1st island what these different buildings were used for? barham:	 i don’t know at all i would say it never i said registered for me to find out danny:	and where did you catch the ferry boat?  barham:	here is the ferry slip here danny:	right at the western end. burham:	that was a slip. oh this is a clearer picture too. we were supposed to go over there i belong to a senior citizens’ group. we were supposed to go but it didn’t materialize i don’t know for what reason.  danny:	what year were you working here again? barham:	it can be 29 and then i went home at 31 when my daughter was born 31.  danny:	how did it feel to go back to england i mean did you--?  barham:	i was very homesick that was one reason why i went home but after i went home i didn’t mind coming back at all. here suddenly much more different things. we had refrigerators and all that sort of thing here and we didn’t have there. danny:	did you miss anything in england that wasn’t here.  barham:	not particularly. no i went home as i say in 31 then i didn’t go home again until 54. i had a brother in south africa that was home. he came home. then i went home in 64, then i went home in 72 and then i went home last year. but i wouldn’t want to go back to live again.  danny:	why do you say that?  barham:	i don’t know it’s a different feeling altogether. as i say got so much more stuff now got all these microwaves and refrigerators and all that kind of thing. my sister in laws, nephew’s wives rather they’ve all got their own homes. i have one sister in law left but i’m the last of eight children all my brothers and sisters have died.  danny:	how did it feel to become a citizen?  barham:	i just did it because that’s all i had to do and for the sake of my children with the war being on i thought if my husband went up to join the service and anything happened i wouldn’t-- it was for the sake of the children’s that i decided to come.  so i don’t remember the building that i went into a now just on broadway somewhere went to a big room and they asked you a lot of questions i don’t have to go through because after five years you don’t when i first came here you had to make it what they call first papers then wait five years to make second papers and i didn’t have to make any second papers at all i married an american citizen.  danny:	do you have any idea what would have happened if you did not work with the fullers?  barham:	i guess i’d do domestic work in england most of the time i guess i would have done that. work for somebody it was quite popular looked down but now they don’t do it so much anymore. i worked with different people, balala hotel when i lived in new york we had lots of different people there. mrs. kennedy and we used to check courts down there for parties so i met lots of different people there.   danny:	end of tape 1 side 2 end of interview.